no_title

DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY

OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF NAVAL OPERATIONS

2000 NAVY PENTAGON WASHINGTON, DC 20350-2000

5720 Ser DNS-36GC/21U103117 December 22, 2021

Sent via email to: john@greenewald.com

Mr. John Greenewald The Black Vault 27305 W. Live Oak Rd Suite # 1203 Castaic, CA 91384

Dear Mr. Greenewald:

This is our response to your Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) referral from the OSD/JS FOIA office. Your original request was dated February 1, 2021 and forwarded to our office on October 25, 2021 under referral number 21-F-0511. Upon receipt your request was inputted into FOIA online and assigned FOA case tracking number DON-NAVY-2022-000883.

You requested: “Security Classification Guide" located within your agency, which pertain to any of the following: Unidentified Aerial Phenomena (UAP) Task Force or the "UAPTF" and/or "Advanced Aerospace Threat Identification program" or "AATIP" (also referred to as the "Advanced Aviation Threat Identification Program") and/or "Unidentified Flying Objects" or UFOs and/or "Unidentified Aerial Phenomena" or "UAPs"”

In an effort to assist you, we consulted with the Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Information Dominance (DCNO N2/N6) to conduct a search and locate any records responsive to your request.

N2N6 informed this office that they located one record totaling 10 pages. Upon review of the record it has been determined that some portions are denied under FOIA 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(1), in accordance Executive Order 13526, Section 1.4 part (c) as it pertains to intelligence activities (including covert action), intelligence sources or methods, or cryptology.

It has also been determined that some portions are denied under FOIA 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(6) since release of this information would since release of this information would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of individual's personal privacy, in this instance the names of third-party

individuals, and phone number were redacted. The remainder of the document is released to you.

You have the right to an appeal within 90 calendar days from the date of this letter. There are two ways to file an appeal: through FOIAonline or by mail.

(1) Through FOIAonline. This will work only if you set up an account on FOIAonline before you make the request that you would like to appeal. To set up an account, go to FOIAonline (this is a website that will appear as the top hit if you search the internet for “FOIAonline”), click “Create Account” (a link located within the blue banner at the top in the upper right corner), enter your data into the field that subsequently appears, and click “Save” (at the bottom left of the screen). With your account thereby created, you will have the power to file an appeal on FOIAonline to any request you file on FOIAonline thereafter. To do so, locate your request (enter a keyword or the request tracking number in the “Search for” field on the “Search” tab), click on it, then the "Create Appeal" tab in the left-hand column. Complete the subsequent field, click “Save,” and FOIAonline will submit your appeal.

(2) By mail. Address your appeal to:

The Judge Advocate General (Code 14) 1322 Patterson Avenue SE, Suite 3000 Washington Navy Yard, DC 20374-5066

If filing an appeal by mail please provide a letter that explains what you are appealing with any supporting arguments or reasons you think may be worthy of consideration;

b. A copy of your initial request;

c. A copy of the letter of denial.

Also, please provide me a copy of your appeal letter at:

DONFOIA-PA@NAVY. MIL

Questions regarding the action this office has taken during the processing of your request may be directed to our FOIA service center at (202) 685-0412 or via email at DONFOIA-PA@navy.mil, and reference the FOIA tracking numbers cited above.

Sincerely,

G. Cason

Deputy Director,

DON FOIA/PA Program Office

This document is made available through the declassification efforts and research of John Greenewald, Jr., creator of:

The Black Vault

The Black Vault is the largest online Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) document clearinghouse in the world. The research efforts here are responsible for the declassification of hundreds of thousands of pages released by the U.S. Government & Military.

Discover the Truth at: http://www.theblackvault.com

Unidentified Aerial Phenomenon (UAP)

Security Classification Guide (SCG), ID# 04-030

Naval Intelligence Activity

DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT B: DUlribution authorized 10 U.S. Govmunent Agencies for Operational Security PUlJIOS<S (16 April 2020). Other requests for this document must be referred 10 the Director, Naval Intelligence Activity, 2000 Navy Pentagon, Room 5BlS3, Washington, D.C. 20350·2000.

HANDLING AND DESTRUCTION NOTICE: Comply with distribution suuement and destroy by ally method thai will prevent disclosure of contents or reconstruction of this document.

Classified By: Mr. Scott Bray, Director, Navallntelligcnce Activity Reason: 1.4(c) DeclassifY On: 20450416

PREPARED /6 lIere Zo2 '-'

REVIEWED BY: DATE: I tA"'I- 202 (.)

APPROVED BY:

Direclor. Intelligence Activily (NIA) Top Secrel Original Classificalion AUlhorily (OCA)

t ... L.IL "J. · ' 1 . 14.!.t.lt;..! IJ..2000

2

(U) SECfION 1 -IDENTIFYING DATA:

ID: 04-030

SU: Unidentified Aerial Phenomenon (UAP)

PR: Office of Naval Intelligence (ONn

CA: Mr. Scott Bray, Director, Naval Intelligence Activity, Top Secret Original Classification Authority (OCA effective 17 June 2019) ,

OD: 20200416

RD: 20250416

(U) SECTION 2 - GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS:

1. (U) Purpose: This classification guide is issued for the purpose of identifYing specific topics of information associated with the Office of Naval Intelligence, Unidentified Aerial Phenomenon (UAP) Task Force that meet the standards and criteria for classification and protection in accordance with Executive Order (E.O.) 13526, "Classified National Security Information," as amended, and its implementing directives.

2. (U)Authority: This guide is issued under authority ofSECNAV M·5510.36 and E.O. 13526,

DoOM 5200.01 Volumes 1-4. This guide constitutes authority and may be cited as the basis for classification, regrading, or declassification of information and material involved in UAP collection and analysis. Changes in classification required by application of this guide shall be made immediately. Information identified in this guide for protection as classified information is classified by the Director, Naval Intelligence Activity, a TOP SECRET Original Classification Authority.

3. (U) Classification Challenges: If at any time security classification guidance contained herein is challenged or temporary markings ofa higher classification ore mode, the items of information involved shall continue to be protected at the level prescribed by this guide until a formal decision by an appropriate authority is made. Classification challenges should be addressed to the PR, noted in Section I above.

4. (U) Reproduction, Extraction and Dissemination: This guide may be reproduced and disseminated as needed. However, to ensure receipt of updates, revisions, and classification changes, whenever this guide is disseminated beyond an initial addressee, notify the PRo

5. (U) Public Release: The fact that this guide shows certain details of information to be unclassified, including controlled unclassified information, does not allow automatic public release of this information. 000 or Navy information requested by the media or members of the public or proposed for release to the public by 000 civilians or military personnel or their contractors shall be processed in accordance with 000 Manual 5200.01, SECNAV M·55 10.36, 000 Directive 5230.09, 000 Instruction 5230.29, 000 5400.7·R, and SECNAVINST 5720.42G, as applicable. Proposed public disclosures of unclassified information regarding UAP shall be processed through the cognizant NlA Freedom of Information Act Officer.

6. (U) ForeIgn Disclosure: Any disclosure to foreign officials of information classified by this guide shall be in accordance with the procedures set forth in SECNAVINST 55 I 0.34A and Deportment of the Navy Foreign Disclosure Manual of September 2007. If a country with which the 000 ha~ entered into n reciprocal procurement memorandum of understanding or offset arrangement expresses an interest in this effort, a foreign disclosure review must be conducted prior to issuance of a solicitation.

7. (U) Definitions: Unidentified Aerial Phenomenon (UAP): Any aerial phenomenon that cannot be immediately identified.

8. (U) Classification Authority Block: Classified By: Mr. Scon Bray. Director. Naval Intelligence Activity Reason: l.4(c) DeclassifY On: 20450415

(U) SECTION 3 - OVERALL EFFORT:

1. (U) Identification: Where information pertaining to UAP has been obtained or developed through the use of classified sources or methods, the proper classification of a resultant item of information or material will be the highest classification set forth in either this classification guide, or the classification guide or guides applicable to the sources or methods used to obtain the UAP information or material. Accordingly, inCormation about UAP designated herein as SECRET/IREL FVEY may well be TOP SECRETIISCIIINOFORN due to the sources or methods through which the UAP information was collected. In those cases where the sources or methods used to acquire the UAP information or material would lead to a higher classification level, the applicable sca pertaining to those sources or methods should be cited as the classification authority, not this guide.

3. (U) Goal and Mission: The mission of the task force is to detect, analyze, catalog, consolidate and exploit advanced non-traditional aerospace vehicles posing an operational threat to U.S. National Security ond ovoid strategic surprise.

4. (U) End Item:

1RIIyze. catalos. consolidate. and exploit nm· U1dJbonal ar:rospacc vebic:IeslUAP posma an opmborIaI ~IIO U S National Security and .~ otd

--------------------------------------------------------------------

(b) (1) (B)

I As noted In section 1. PlrI. 8, where Informitlan pertJblll1I to UAP has teen obtained or developed throulh the use of classified sources or methods, the proper clllitficaUon of a resuttlnt Item of Informltion or matertll wlU be the h1lhest cI,sslficatlon or whit Is stated In thlJ dlsstflatlon auld. or the damnation lulde or Bukteslppllab!e to the souttes or methods used to obtain the UAP Informltlon or maler~l , -1lIIY. thedoHifiallionlewlnotod below....., be _ H the IIIUItO at method used to collKllho _._. h ..... ' .... 1 of dassHkaUon.

DOD SECURITY CLASSIFICATION GUIDE DATA ELEMENTS

DD'(:JI(AR) 1418

. BIENNIAL

IC I. NEW

e. CANCELLATION

REVIEW

CORRECTION

GUICE

doaJl7lt!n/. /fno pt'DtrIUIgl/ing doamenr. SECNAVINST 5510.368

Unidentified Aerial Phenomenon (UAP)

(llonol_a

N1A Washington DC

200415

x

o

E

IC B

NO

_1_ (YYI.fAlDD). It".".. JO""" _ , c:/1an1c1arJ)

. Dono/

(Donot_S _811)

None

2l05U

SPECIAL ACCESS REOUIRED

C U

T5 IC 5

I . YES

None.

I .

Scott W. Bmy, SES-3, USN

c.

OPNAVN2N61

I