HAARP, Earthquakes, and Hurricanes - Conspiracy

montalk.net » 13 July 08 HAARP, Earthquakes, and Hurricanes

Can HAARP manipulate storms, hurricanes, and earthquakes? There is definitely a correlation between these and when HAARP is active. This article will give some examples of that correlation. And while that alone does not prove a direct causal

relationship, the physics of HAARP and the political agenda behind the program suggest that weather and earthquake manipulation is both possible and likely.

Background

I assume everyone reading this knows of HAARP. Less known is that HAARP is only one of several such facilities — and not the

most powerful one either. There are others, here are five:

1) Mu Radar – 1 megawatt facility in Japan (34°51'14.80"N 136° 6'19.45"E).

2) Arecibo Observatory – 2 megawatt facility in Puerto Rico (18°20'38.97"N 66°45'9.77"W).

3) HIPAS – 70 megawatt facility east of Fairbanks, Alaska (64°52'21.18"N 146°50'18.78"W).

4) Sura – 190 megawatt facility in central Russia (56° 7'10.32"N 46° 2'4.41"E).

5) EISCAT – 1 gigawatt facility in Tromsø, Northern Norway (69°35'1.06"N 19°12'57.11"E).

(you can copy and paste the coordinates into google maps)

By comparison, HAARP (near Gakona, Alaska – 62°23'33.73"N 145° 9'2.61"W) is claimed to be a mere 3.6 megawatt facility — and that’s after being upgraded in 2006. It has 278 times less maximum power than the ionospheric heater in Norway.

Nevertheless, HAARP is far from useless. According to the DARPA:

Key to the current effort was the expansion of the experimental research facility that includes a 3.6 MW high-

frequency transmitter and a variety of diagnostic instruments, to conduct investigations to characterize the

physical processes that can be initiated and controlled in the ionosphere and space, via interactions with high

power radio waves. Among these were: (1) the generation of extremely low frequency/very low frequency radio waves for submarine and other subsurface communication, and the reduction of charged particle populations in

the radiation belts to ensure safe spacecraft systems operations; (2) the control of electron density gradients and

the refractive properties in selected regions of the ionosphere to create radio wave propagation channels; and (3)

the generation of optical and infrared emissions in space to calibrate space sensors.

A study completed by an Air Force/Navy Panel also pointed to additional high-value functions that can

potentially be accomplished with the a 3.6 MW capability, in particular, the exploration and refinement of scientific principles that could lead to the development and deployment of a system to provide protection for

spacebased assets from emergent asymmetric threats. (source)

HAARP alone has many applications, primarily military, and those listed above are just a small “safe to reveal” set of examples.

If 3.6 MW can accomplish these, imagine what 1000 MW might do!

There is an interesting anecdotal account by Dan Eden of HAARP being used for surreptitious purposes. Furthermore, he

claimed that there was a second, secret, more powerful installation in Alaska. Now in 2008, a decade later, the existence of that

facility is no longer secret and its name is HIPAS, which is indeed almost twenty times as powerful as HAARP.

Physics of HAARP

What makes these ionospheric heaters so useful is that they consist of phased arrays. A phased array is a grid of antennas whose

phases (timing) and amplitudes are individually adjustable. This means a great variety of different combinations can be tried

out, synthesizing new and complex total wave forms. Phasing allows the output to be pointed in different directions without

having to move the antennas themselves.

For anyone familiar with the works of Tom Bearden, phased arrays also allow for partial phase conjugation or canceling of

the emitted electromagnetic waves. When EM waves have either (or both) of their electric and magnetic components cancelled, the contained energy takes the form of a longitudinal, potential, scalar, gravitational, or temporal wave instead.

Ionospheric heaters can also “control electron density gradients and the refractive properties in selected regions of the

ionosphere” meaning it can modulate ionospheric electron density. That is another powerful method of generating longitudinal

waves, using the sky itself as a giant longitudinal antenna.

And so phased arrays can be used to generate an entirely different type of radiation, one that cannot be detected with

standard EM-measuring instruments. Depending on their frequency and type, these waves can theoretically affect human

emotion and biology, influence the weather, alter tectonic dynamics, and even manipulate our surrounding hyper-dimensional environment to allow for controlled invisibility and interdimensional maneuvering of military personnel and vehicles. In

essence, everything that regular electromagnetic waves cannot really do.

This much I find plausible, that HAARP-like technologies are active on a level superseding those of regular

electromagnetism, and that this is what HAARP and its sister facilities are really being used for. It is nothing the public knows

about or can comprehend because this technology uses an expanded kind of physics of which only a small and sterilized subset

comprises mainstream college textbooks. But it can be figured out if you have a physics background and study the implications and applications of force-free potential fields, as I have demonstrated at the Scalar Physics Research Center website.

Weather Manipulation

Now let’s look at some potential correlations between notable weather events and when HAARP was active. Its activity can be

read from the waterfall chart published on the HAARP website. According to the site:

This chart is a waterfall plot of the readings taken by the Spectrum Monitor for the last 36 hours. The vertical axis

is the frequency, ranging from 1 – 30 Mhz and the horizontal axis is the UTC time. Spectrum samples are taken

every few minutes. The color indicates intensity of received signal at each frequency, ranging from deep blue for

the weakest signals to red, yellow and white for the strongest signals.

HAARP activity is indicated by sharply defined patterns on the waterfall chart, like the slots on a piano roll or stripes on a spectrograph. There is also background noise in the charts, but those are more diffuse. What matters is the sharp patterns, their

presence, sequence, when they start and stop.

Hurricane Katrina – August 23-30, 2005

HAARP was highly active in the weeks before Katrina, during, and a short time after. The correlation is therefore not complete.

If HAARP were inactive during that time, then it could be proven that it had absolutely nothing to do with Katrina, but since it

was indeed active, a possible link still remains.

August 22 – Remnants of Tropical Depression Ten move into position.

August 23 – Remnants form into Tropical Depression Twelve.

August 24 – Depression strengthens and is renamed Tropical Storm Katrina.

August 25 – Katrina strengthens and becomes Category 1 hurricane and strikes southeast Florida.

August 26 – Katrina weakens to tropical storm, exits on the west side of Florida into warm waters, then re-intensifies into a Category 1 hurricane. It rapidly gains strength.

August 27 – Katrina reaches the central Gulf and becomes a large and well-organized Category 3 hurricane.

August 28 – Katrina comes within a few hundred miles off the coast and grows to Category 4 early in the day, then to Category 5 by midday.

August 29 – Katrina makes landfall with 155 mph winds.

August 30 – Katrina weakens to a heavy storm affecting Tennessee and surrounding areas.

(Sources: Wikipedia and National Geographic)

Hurricane Ophelia – September 8-16, 2005

Hurricane Ophelia never got past Category 1. But it had a highly erratic, meandering pathway including a clockwise loop halfway

through (September 10-12).

Forecasters had a tough time predicting its path and behavior. The hurricane formed on September 8, slipping in and out of hurricane status several times before fizzling out on September 16 and moving into the North Atlantic.

Page 7 of 25 http://montalk.net/conspiracy/142/haarp-earthquakes-and-hurricanes

Page 8 of 25 http://montalk.net/conspiracy/142/haarp-earthquakes-and-hurricanes

Page 9 of 25 http://montalk.net/conspiracy/142/haarp-earthquakes-and-hurricanes

(Sources: Wikipedia and Palm Beach Post

This chart compares HAARP activity with Ophelia’s wind speed:

If HAARP had anything to do with this, it would more likely have been for testing hurricane steering.

2006 and 2007

The two years following Katrina had very quiet hurricane seasons compared to what was predicted.

2006 Hurricane Forecast a Flop

MIAMI (AP – Dec 2006) — The mild 2006 Atlantic hurricane season draws to a close Thursday without a single hurricane striking the United States — a stark contrast to the record-breaking 2005 season that killed more than

1,500 people and left thousands homeless along the Gulf Coast.

Nine named storms and five hurricanes formed this season, and just two of the hurricanes were considered major. […]

In May, scientists predicted 13 to 16 named storms and eight to 10 hurricanes, with four to six of them major. […]

Bell urged people not to become complacent about the next season (2007), which starts June 1. Forecasters say the Atlantic is still in an active hurricane period that began in 1995 and could last another decade or more.

(source)

Very Active 2007 Hurricane Season Predicted

ScienceDaily (Apr. 3, 2007) — The U.S. Atlantic basin will likely experience a very active hurricane season, the Colorado State University forecast team announced today, increasing its earlier prediction for the 2007 hurricane season.

The team’s forecast now anticipates 17 named storms forming in the Atlantic basin between June 1 and Nov. 30. Nine of the 17 storms are predicted to become hurricanes, and of those nine, five are expected to develop into intense or major hurricanes (Saffir/Simpson category 3-4-5) with sustained winds of 111 mph or greater. (source)

2007 Hurricane Season Ending Raises Forecast Concerns

National Geographic (November 30, 2007) – The 2007 Atlantic hurricane season, which officially ends today,

has—like last year—failed to live up to the predictions of forecasters.

Now some experts fear the second year of inaccurate preseason predictions will shake the public’s faith in all hurricane forecasts—even when a storm is bearing down upon them. (source)

Compared to a prediction of 17 storms, 9 of those hurricanes, and 5 major hurricanes, 2007 instead ended with 15 storms, 6 hurricanes, and 2 major ones. So compared to forecasts, 2007 and 2006 were surprisingly calm.

Hurricane Bertha

Recently the first hurricane of the 2008 season formed.

Big Bertha: A Bad Omen?

Washington Post (July 8, 2008) – After explosive development yesterday, Hurricane Bertha is struggling today. Its maximum winds have dropped from 120 mph last night to 105 mph as of 11 a.m. and it has been downgraded to a category two storm. […]

While it remains to be seen whether Bertha will affect any land areas, it will go down in history as a record-

breaking storm and may be a harbinger of a very active hurricane season. […] Bertha easily broke the record for becoming the furthest east named storm prior to August 1. (source)

Hurricane Bertha “One for the Record Books”

The Daily Green (July 9, 2008) – From the start, there was something pretty odd about Hurricane Bertha.

The storm formed just before Independence Day last week, and immediately showed plenty of it. Bertha developed from a tropical wave almost immediately as the disturbance came off the coast of Africa, and so became the most easterly forming July tropical storm known to us, as well as the most easterly forming Atlantic tropical storm period. […]

As Bertha moved steadily westward, she intensified, first becoming a hurricane and then exploding into a powerful Category 3 major hurricane Monday with 120 mile per hour winds — and possibly, for a brief while, a

Category 4. It’s the earliest we’ve seen such an intense Atlantic hurricane since the year 2005, when hurricanes Dennis and Emily were Category 4 and 5 storms, respectively, in July. Dennis reached Category 4 strength on

July 7 of that year … the same day on which Bertha exploded three years later.

That’s a particularly worrisome precedent because in 2005, the hurricane year only got worse after Dennis — featuring Category 5s Katrina, Rita, and Wilma.

But perhaps even more worrisome is this recent appearance of very intense hurricanes in July, a month that

traditionally has not featured many of them. Says Holland: “It is notable that we have had a remarkable run of

July storms, which over the past decade have been running more than 50% above the previous average.” Technically, given her origins so close to the African coast, Bertha is categorized as a Cape Verde-type hurricane,

and those tend to be the most powerful and destructive of them all. But they don’t generally form until later in the hurricane season … or, at least, that’s how it used to be. (source)

The most important feature of this hurricane was how rapidly it grew on July 7 before weakening just as quickly. At sunrise it

was Category 1, and within twelve short hours Bertha had grown into a Category 3 (possibly 4) hurricane. Something unusual

happened just on that afternoon. Here are the HAARP charts before, during, and after this event:

Notice that the only significant activity occurs during a short window of time. The July 7 chart shows HAARP was active

between 16:25 and 17:25 UTC — between 12:25 PM and 1:25 PM Eastern Time — on that same Monday afternoon when Bertha suddenly became Category 3.

HAARP was not active before or after that event, and likewise Bertha was not as strong before or after. Bertha faded out

afterwards. The correlation there is complete.

If HAARP was responsible for manipulating Hurricane Bertha, then the fact that it happened so quickly and nothing

destructive ultimately came of it indicates a test or practice run. And with news of Bertha being a record-breaking hurricane foreshadowing an ominous hurricane season, the stage is set for an orchestrated hurricane disaster wherever convenient.

HAARP went active July 14-15, coinciding once again with Bertha (just a strong storm now) strengthening suddenly.

Sunday July 13 – no activity.

Monday July 14 – HAARP goes active between 10:00 – 22:30 UTC (6 AM – 6:30 PM Eastern).

“After looking rather anemic early Monday morning …Bertha’s ‘convection’ erupted during the day along with the

storm also getting more symmetrically and solidly organized by late afternoon. […]”

“From the southwest edge of the eye, near the radar site, to the northeast edge, was just a hair under 150 kilometers (the rings are spaced every 50 km), or about 90 miles. I don’t know if there’s an official “record” for

eye diameter, but I can’t offhand remember ever seeing any that have been bigger than that.” (source)

Tuesday July 15 – “From the National Hurricane Center: BERTHA IS NOW THE LONGEST-LIVED JULY

TROPICAL STORM IN ATLANTIC” (source)

Bertha had been weakening for days leading up to July 14, while HAARP had been quiet for that same period of time. Then HAARP turned on, and Bertha rapidly gained strength. Further, it gained strength at precisely the right moment to hit Bermuda

the hardest. Together with the July 7 charts, this makes a very strong case that Bertha’s sudden strength gains are linked to

HAARP.

Myanmar Cyclone and China’s 2008 Earthquake

Both the cyclone that hit Burma and the earthquake that struck China tightly coincided with the same HAARP activity period.

Cyclone Nargis was the worst natural disaster to hit Burma in recorded history, killing at least 85,000 people. The China

earthquake led to the deaths of at least 80,000 people.

HAARP activity began at 5:45 UTC on April 27, 2008.

“In the last week of April 2008, an area of deep convection persisted near a low-level circulation in the Bay of Bengal about 1150 km (715 mi) east-southeast of Chennai, India.”

“On April 28 Nargis became nearly stationary while located between ridges to its northwest and southeast. That

day the JTWC upgraded the storm to cyclone status, the equivalent of a minimal hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson hurricane scale.”

“Early on April 29, the JTWC estimated Nargis reached winds of 160 km/h (100 mph), and at the same time the

IMD classified the system as a very severe cyclonic storm. […] By late on April 29, convection had begun to

rebuild, though immediate restrengthening was prevented by increased wind shear”

“On May 1, after turning nearly due eastward, Cyclone Nargis began rapidly intensifying, due to greatly improved outflow in association with an approaching upper-level trough. Strengthening continued as it developed a well-

defined eye with a diameter of 19 km (12 mi), and early on May 2 the JTWC estimated the cyclone reached peak winds of 215 km/h (135 mph) as it approached the coast of Burma, making it a category 4 storm.”

Page 19 of 25 http://montalk.net/conspiracy/142/haarp-earthquakes-and-hurricanes

“Around 1200 UTC on May 2, Cyclone Nargis made landfall in the Ayeyarwady Division of Burma at peak strength. The storm gradually weakened as it procceded east over Burma, with its proximity to the Andaman Sea

preventing rapid weakening. Its track turned to the northeast due to the approach of a mid-latitude trough to its northwest, passing just north of Yangon with winds of 130 km/h (80 mph).”

Page 20 of 25 http://montalk.net/conspiracy/142/haarp-earthquakes-and-hurricanes

“Early on May 3 the IMD issued its final advisory on the storm. It quickly weakened after turning to the northeast toward the rugged terrain near the Burma-Thailand border, and after deteriorating to minimal tropical storm

status, the JTWC issued its last advisory on Nargis.” (source)

After Nargis, HAARP continued operating for another week:

Page 22 of 25 http://montalk.net/conspiracy/142/haarp-earthquakes-and-hurricanes

Page 23 of 25 http://montalk.net/conspiracy/142/haarp-earthquakes-and-hurricanes

Page 24 of 25 http://montalk.net/conspiracy/142/haarp-earthquakes-and-hurricanes

HAARP ceased activity at 22 UTC on May 11, 2008. The China earthquake struck a little more than eight hours later at 6:28

UTC on May 12. In the days and minutes before the quake, there were reports of strange phenomena including bizarre toad

behavior and iridescent clouds. Earthquakes are typically “in the works” days or weeks before going off, and animals, sensitive

people, and scalar detectors can sense the nonphysical precursors to these quakes.

One has to wonder, if earthquakes generate and are preceded by scalar waves, could scalar waves likewise trigger earthquakes? If so, the phased array of various ionospheric heaters around the world may be capable of doing this for political

and military purposes. The quake was certainly convenient for western military factions:

Earthquake Destroyed China’s Largest Military Armory, Says Source

A high-level Chinese military source secretly disclosed last week that the recent earthquake in Sichuan Province

caused a chain-reaction of explosions in the Sichuan mountain areas. The explosions destroyed Chinese army’s

largest armory, new weapon test bases and part of nuclear facilities including several nuclear warheads. This

information is considered China’s top military secret. […]

After carefully analyzing seismic data, military experts in southeast Asia confirmed a non-geological shock had occurred at the earthquake epicenter. The energy released was equivalent to that of an underground nuclear

explosion. (source)

There is not enough actual energy being outputted by ionospheric heaters to directly power an earthquake, but they don’t need

that much power if they merely act as nonlinear imbalancers, triggers, or redirectors of existing large natural energy flows.

Was the earthquake just a random natural event? Or was it strategically and intentionally created? Consider this:

The official death toll was 80,000.

HAARP shut off ~8 hours before the quake struck.

Earthquake was of magnitude 8.0.

It happened on May 12th (5/12 = 5 + 1 + 2 = 8).

The earthquake occurred exactly 88 days before the Beijing Olympics.

The Olympics began on 8/8/08 at 8:08 PM.

Coincidence?