Face Recognition Vendor Test (FRVT), Part 3: Demographic Effects

Face Recognition Vendor Test (FRVT)

Part 3: Demographic Effects

Patrick Grother

Mei Ngan Kayee Hanaoka

This publication is available free of charge from:

https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

Face Recognition Vendor Test (FRVT)

Part 3: Demographic Effects

Patrick Grother

Mei Ngan Kayee Hanaoka Information Access Division Information Technology Laboratory

This publication is available free of charge from:

https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

December 2019

U.S. Department of Commerce

Wilbur L. Ross, Jr., Secretary

National Institute of Standards and Technology Walter Copan, NIST Director and Undersecretary of Commerce for Standards and Technology

Certain commercial entities, equipment, or materials may be identified in this document in order to describe an experimental procedure or concept adequately. Such identification is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by the

National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor is it intended to imply that the

entities, materials, or equipment are necessarily the best available for the purpose.

National Institute of Standards and Technology Interagency or Internal Report 8280

Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. Interag. Intern. Rep. 8280, 81 pages (December 2019)

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 1

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

OVERVIEW This is the third in a series of reports on ongoing face recognition vendor tests (FRVT) executed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). The ﬁrst two reports cover, respectively, the performance of one-to-one face recognition algorithms used for veriﬁcation of asserted identities, and performance of one-to-many face recognition algorithms used for identiﬁcation of individuals in photo data bases. This document extends those evaluations to document accuracy variations across demographic groups.

MOTIVATION The recent expansion in the availability, capability, and use of face recognition has been accompanied by assertions that demographic dependencies could lead to accuracy variations and potential bias. A report from Georgetown University [14] work noted that prior studies [22], articulated sources of bias, described the potential impacts particularly in a policing context, and discussed policy and regulatory implications. Additionally, this work is motivated by studies of demographic effects in more recent face recognition [9,16,23] and gender estimation algorithms [5,36].

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

SCOPE NIST has conducted tests to quantify demographic differences in contemporary face recognition algorithms. This report provides details about the recognition process, notes where demographic effects could occur, details speciﬁc performance metrics and analyses, gives empirical results, and recommends research into the mitigation of performance deﬁciencies.

AIMS AND

NIST intends this report to inform discussion and decisions about the accuracy, utility, and limitations of face recognition technologies. Its intended audience includes policy makers, face recognition algorithm developers, systems integrators, and managers of face recognition systems concerned with mitigation of risks implied by demographic differentials.

WHAT WE DID The NIST Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) quantiﬁed the accuracy of face recognition algorithms for demographic groups deﬁned by sex, age, and race or country of birth.

We used both one-to-one veriﬁcation algorithms and one-to-many identiﬁcation search algorithms. These were submitted to the FRVT by corporate research and development laboratories and a few universities. As prototypes, these algorithms were not necessarily available as mature integrable products. Their performance is detailed in FRVT reports [16,17].

We used these algorithms with four large datasets of photographs collected in U.S. governmental applications that are currently in operation:

▷Domestic mugshots collected in the United States.

▷Application photographs from a global population of applicants for immigration beneﬁts.

▷Visa photographs submitted in support of visa applicants.

▷Border crossing photographs of travelers entering the United States.

All four datasets were collected for authorized travel, immigration or law enforcement processes. The ﬁrst three sets have good compliance with image capture standards. The last set does not, given constraints on capture duration and environment. Together these datasets allowed us to process a total of 18.27 million images of 8.49 million people through 189 mostly commercial algorithms from 99 developers.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 2

The datasets were accompanied by sex and age metadata for the photographed individuals. The mugshots have metadata for race, but the other sets only have country-of-birth information. We restrict the analysis to 24 countries in 7 distinct global regions that have seen lower levels of long-distance immigration. While country-of-birth information may be a reasonable proxy for race in these countries, it stands as a meaningful factor in its own right particularly for travel-related applications of face recognition.

The tests aimed to determine whether, and to what degree, face recognition algorithms differed when they processed photographs of individuals from various demographics. We assessed accuracy by demographic group and report on false negative and false positive effects. False negatives are the failure to associate one person in two images; they occur when the similarity between two photos is low, reﬂecting either some change in the person’s appearance or in the image properties. False positives are the erroneous association of samples of two persons; they occur when the digitized faces of two people are similar.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

In background material that follows we give examples of how algorithms are used, and we elaborate on the consequences of errors noting that the impacts of demographic differentials can be advantageous or disadvantageous depending on the application.

FOUND The accuracy of algorithms used in this report has been documented in recent FRVT evaluation reports [16, 17]. These show a wide range in accuracy across developers, with the most accurate algorithms producing many fewer errors. These algorithms can therefore be expected to have smaller demographic differentials.

WHAT WE

Contemporary face recognition algorithms exhibit demographic differentials of various magnitudes. Our main result is that false positive differentials are much larger than those related to false negatives and exist broadly, across many, but not all, algorithms tested. Across demographics, false positives rates often vary by factors of 10 to beyond 100 times. False negatives tend to be more algorithm-speciﬁc, and vary often by factors below 3.

▷False positives: Using the higher quality Application photos, false positive rates are highest in West and East African and East Asian people, and lowest in Eastern European individuals. This effect is generally large, with a factor of 100 more false positives between countries. However, with a number of algorithms developed in China this effect is reversed, with low false positive rates on East Asian faces. With domestic law enforcement images, the highest false positives are in American Indians, with elevated rates in African American and Asian populations; the relative ordering depends on sex and varies with algorithm.

We found false positives to be higher in women than men, and this is consistent across algorithms and datasets. This effect is smaller than that due to race.

We found elevated false positives in the elderly and in children; the effects were larger in the oldest and youngest, and smallest in middle-aged adults.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 3

▷False negatives: With domestic mugshots, false negatives are higher in Asian and American Indian individuals, with error rates above those in white and African American faces (which yield the lowest false negative rates). However, with lower-quality border crossing images, false negatives are generally higher in people born in Africa and the Caribbean, the effect being stronger in older individuals. These differing results relate to image quality: The mugshots were collected with a photographic setup speciﬁcally standardized to produce high-quality images across races; the border crossing images deviate from face image quality standards.

In cooperative access control applications, false negatives can be remedied by users making second attempts.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

The presence of an enrollment database affords one-to-many identiﬁcation algorithms a resource for mitigation of demographic effects that purely one-to-one veriﬁcation systems do not have. Nevertheless, demographic differentials present in one-to-one veriﬁcation algorithms are usually, but not always, present in one-to-many search algorithms. One important exception is that some developers supplied highly accurate identiﬁcation algorithms for which false positive differentials are undetectable.

More detailed results are introduced in the Technical Summary.

Operational implementations usually employ a single face recognition algorithm. Given algorithm-speciﬁc variation, it is incumbent upon the system owner to know their algorithm. While publicly available test data from NIST and elsewhere can inform owners, it will usually be informative to speciﬁcally measure accuracy of the operational algorithm on the operational image data, perhaps employing a biometrics testing laboratory to assist.

IMPLICATIONS

OF THESE

TESTS

Since different algorithms perform better or worse in processing images of individuals in various demographics, policy makers, face recognition system developers, and end users should be aware of these differences and use them to make decisions and to improve future performance. We supplement this report with more than 1200 pages of charts contained in seventeen annexes that include exhaustive reporting of results for each algorithm. These are intended to show the breadth of the effects, and to inform the algorithm developers.

There are a variety of techniques that might mitigate performance limitations of face recognition systems performance issues overall and speciﬁcally those that relate to demographics. This report includes recommendations for research in developing and evaluating the value, costs, and beneﬁts of potential mitigation techniques - see sections 8 and 9.

Reporting of demographic effects often has been incomplete in academic papers and in media coverage. In particular, accuracy is discussed without stating the quantity of interest be it false negatives, false positives or failure to enroll. As most systems are conﬁgured with a ﬁxed threshold, it is necessary to report both false negative and false positive rates for each demographic group at that threshold. This is rarely done - most reports are concerned only with false negatives. We make suggestions for augmenting reporting with respect to demographic difference and effects.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 4

BACKGROUND: ALGORITHMS, ERRORS, IMPACTS

Before presenting results in the Technical Summary we describe what face recognition is, contrasting it with other applications that analyze faces, and then detail the errors that are possible in face veriﬁcation and identiﬁcation and their impacts.

FACE

ANALYSIS:

CLASSIFICA-

TION,

Much of the discussion of face recognition bias in recent years cites two studies [5,36] showing poor accuracy of face gender classiﬁcation algorithms on black women. Those studies did not evaluate face recognition algorithms, yet the results have been widely cited to indict their accuracy. Our work was undertaken to quantify analogous effects in face recognition algorithms. We strongly recommend that reporting of bias should include information about the class of algorithm evaluated. We use the term face analysis as an umbrella for any algorithm that consumes face images and produces some output. Within that are estimation algorithms that output some continuous quantity (e.g., age or degree of fatigue). There are classiﬁcation algorithms that aim to determine some categorical quantity such as the sex of a person or their emotional state. Face classiﬁcation algorithms are built with inherent knowledge of the classes they aim to produce (e.g., happy, sad). Face recognition algorithms, however, have no built-in notion of a particular person. They are not built to identify particular people; instead they include a face detector followed by a feature extraction algorithm that converts one or more images of a person into a vector of values that relate to the identity of the person. The extractor typically consists of a neural network that has been trained on ID-labeled images available to the developer. In operations, they act as generic extractors of identity-related information from photos of persons they have usually never seen before. Recognition proceeds as a differential operator: Algorithms compare two feature vectors and emit a similarity score. This is a vendor-deﬁned numeric value expressing how similar the parent faces are. It is compared to a threshold value to decide whether two samples are from, or represent, the same person or not. Thus, recognition is mediated by persistent identity information stored in a feature vector (or “template”). Classiﬁcation and estimation, on the other hand, are single-shot operations from one sample alone, employing machinery that is different from that used for face recognition.

ESTIMATION,

RECOGNITION

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

VERIFICATION Errors: A comparison of images from the same person yields a genuine or “mate” score. A comparison of images from different people yields an imposter or “nonmate” score. Ideally, nonmate scores should be low and mate scores should be high. In practice, some imposter scores are above a numeric threshold giving false positives, and some genuine comparisons yield scores below threshold giving false negatives.

Applications: One-to-one veriﬁcation is used in applications including logical access to a phone or physical access through a security check point. It also supports non-repudiation e.g. to authorize the dispensing of a prescription drug. Two photos are involved: one in the database that is compared with one taken of the person seeking access to answer the question: ”Is this the same person or not?”

Impact of errors: Errors have different implications for the system owner and for the individual whose photograph is being used, depending upon the application. In veriﬁcation applications, false negatives cause inconvenience for the user. For example, an individual may not be able to get into their phone or they are delayed entering a facility or crossing a border. These errors can usually be remediated with a second attempt. False positives, on the other hand, present a security concern to the system owner, as they allow access to imposters.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 5

IDENT-

IFICATION Identiﬁcation algorithms, referred to commonly as one-to-many or “1-to-N” search algorithms, notionally compare features extracted from a search “probe” image with all feature vectors previously enrolled from “gallery” images. The algorithms return either a ﬁxed number of the most similar candidates, or only those that are above a preset threshold. A candidate is an index and a similarity score. Some algorithms execute an exhaustive search of all N enrollments and a sort operation to yield the most similar. Other algorithms implement “fast-search” techniques [2,19,21,26] that avoid many of the N comparisons and are therefore highly economical [17].

Identiﬁcation applications: There are two broad uses of identiﬁcation algorithms. First, they can be used to facilitate positive access like in one-to-one veriﬁcation but without presentation of an identity claim. For example, a subject is given access to a building solely on the basis of presentation a photograph that matches any enrolled identity with a score above threshold. Second, they can be used for so-called negative identiﬁcation where the system operator claims implicitly that searched individuals are not enrolled - for example, checking databases of gamblers previously banned from a casino.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

Impacts: As with veriﬁcation, the impact of a demographic differential will depend on the application. In one-to-many searches, false positives primarily occur when a search of a subject who is not present in the database yields a candidate identity for human review. This type of “one to many” search is often employed to check for a person who might be applying for a visa or driver’s license under a name different than their own. False positives may also occur when a search of someone who is enrolled produces the wrong identity with, or instead of, the correct identity. Identiﬁcation algorithms produce such outcomes when the search yields a comparison score above a chosen threshold.

In identiﬁcation applications such as visa or passport fraud detection, or surveillance, a false positive match to another individual could lead to a false accusation, detention or deportation. Higher false negatives would be an advantage to an enrollee in such a system, as their fraud would go undetected, and a disadvantage to the system owner whose security goals will be undermined.

Investigation: This is a special-case application of identiﬁcation algorithms where the threshold is set to zero so that all searches will produce a ﬁxed number of candidates. In such cases, the false positive identiﬁcation rate is 100% because any search of someone not in the database will still yield candidates. Algorithms used in this way are part of a hybrid machinehuman system: The algorithm offers up candidates for human adjudication, for which labor must be available. In such cases, false positive differentials from the algorithm are immaterial

- the machine returns say 50 candidates regardless. What matters then is the human response, and the evidence there is for both poor [10, 42] and varied human capability, even without time constraints [34], and sex and race performance differentials, particularly an interaction between the reviewer’s demographics with those of the photographs under review [7]. The interaction of machine and human is beyond the scope of this report, as is human efﬁcacy.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 6

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This section summarizes the results of the study. This is preceded by an introduction to terminology and discussion of a vital aspect in reporting demographic effects, namely that it is necessary to report both false negative and false positive error rates.

DIFFERENTIALS When similarity scores are computed over a collection of images from demographic A (say elderly Asian men) they may be higher than from demographic B (say young Asian women). We adopt terminology from a Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate article [20] and deﬁne differential performance as a “difference in the genuine or imposter [score] distributions”. Such differentials are inconsequential unless they prompt a differential outcome. An outcome occurs when a score is compared with an operatordeﬁned threshold. A genuine score below threshold yields a false negative outcome, and an imposter score at or above threshold, a false positive outcome. The subject of this report is to quantify differential outcomes between demographics. The term demographic differential is inherited from an ISO technical report [6] now under development.

ACCURACY

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

A crucial point in reasoning about differentials is that the vast majority of biometric systems are conﬁgured with a ﬁxed threshold against which all comparisons are made (i.e., the threshold is not tailored to cameras, environmental conditions or, particularly, demographics). Most academic studies ignore this point (even in demographics e.g., [13]) by reporting false negative rates at ﬁxed false positive rates rather than at ﬁxed thresholds, thereby hiding excursions in false positive rates and misstating false negative rates. This report includes documentation of demographic differentials about typical operating thresholds.

FIXED

THRESHOLD

OPERATION

We report false positive and false negative rates separately because the consequences of each type of error are of importance to different communities. For example, in a one-to-one access control, false negatives inconvenience legitimate users; false positives undermine a system owners security goals. On the other hand, in a one-to-many deportee detection application, a false negative would present a security problem, and a false positive would ﬂag legitimate visitors. The prior probability of imposters in each case is important. For example, in some access control cases, imposters almost never attempt access and the only germane error rate is the false negative rate.

OVERVIEW We found empirical evidence for the existence of demographic differentials in the majority of contemporary face recognition algorithms that we evaluated. The false positive differentials are much larger than those related to false negatives. False positive rates often vary by one or two orders of magnitude (i.e., 10x, 100x). False negative effects vary by factors usually much less than 3. The false positive differentials exist broadly, across many, but not all, algorithms. The false negatives tend to be more algorithm-speciﬁc. Research toward mitigation of differentials is discussed in sections 9 and 8.

RESULTS

The accuracy of algorithms used in this report has been documented in recent FRVT evaluation reports [16, 17]. These show a wide range in accuracy across algorithm developers, with the most accurate algorithms producing many fewer errors than lower-performing variants. More accurate algorithms produce fewer errors, and will be expected therefore to have smaller demographic differentials.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 7

NEGATIVES With regard to false negative demographic differentials we make the observations below. Note that in real-time cooperative applications, false negatives can often be remedied by making second attempts.

FALSE

▷False negative error rates vary strongly by algorithm, from below 0.5% to above 10%. For the more accurate algorithms, false negative rates are usually low with average demographic differentials being, necessarily, smaller still. This is an important result: use of inaccurate algorithms will increase the magnitude of false negative differentials. See Figure 22 and Annex 12 .

▷In domestic mugshots, false negatives are higher in Asian and American Indian individuals, with error rates above those in white and black faces. The lowest false negative rates occur in black faces. This result might not be related to race - it could arise due to differences in the time elapsed between photographs because ageing is highly inﬂuential on face recognition false negatives. We will report on that analysis going forward. See Figure 17.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

▷False negative error rates are often higher in women and in younger individuals, particularly in the mugshot images. There are many exceptions to this, so universal statements pertaining to algorithms false negative rates across sex and age are not supported.

▷When comparing high-quality application photos, error rates are very low and measurement of false negative differentials across demographics is difﬁcult. This implies that better image quality reduces false negative rates and differentials. See Figure 22.

▷When comparing high-quality application images with lower-quality border crossing images, false negative rates are higher than when comparing the application photos. False negative rates are often higher in recognition of women, but the differentials are smaller and not consistent. See Figure 21.

▷In the border crossing images, false negatives are generally higher in individuals born in Africa and the Caribbean, the effect being stronger in older individuals. See Figure 18.

POSITIVES Veriﬁcation Algorithms: With regard to false positive demographic differentials we make the following observations.

FALSE

▷We found false positives to be between 2 and 5 times higher in women than men, the multiple varying with algorithm, country of origin and age. This increase is present for most algorithms and datasets. See Figure 6.

▷With respect to race, false positive rates are highest in West and East African and East Asian people (but with exceptions noted next). False positive rates are also elevated but slightly less so in South Asian and Central American people. The lowest false positive rates generally occur with East European individuals. See Figure 5.

▷A number of algorithms developed in China give low false positive rates on East Asian faces, and sometimes these are lower than those with Caucasian faces. This observation that the location of the developer as a proxy for the race demographics of the data they used in training - matters was noted in 2011 [33], and is potentially important to the reduction of demographic differentials due to race and national origin.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 8

▷We found elevated false positives in the elderly and in children; the effects were larger in the oldest adults and youngest children, and smallest in middle aged adults. The effects are consistent across country-of-birth, datasets and algorithms but vary in magnitude. See Figure 14 and Figure 15.

▷With mugshot images, the highest false positives are in American Indians, with elevated rates in African American and Asian populations; the relative ordering depends on sex and varies with algorithm. See Figure 12 and Figure 13.

Identiﬁcation Algorithms: The presence of an enrollment database affords one-to-many algorithms a resource for mitigation of demographic effects that purely one-to-one veriﬁcation systems do not have. We note that demographic differentials present in one-to-one veriﬁcation algorithms are usually, but not always, present in one-to-many search algorithms. See Section 7.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

One important exception is that some developers supplied identiﬁcation algorithms for which false positive differentials are undetectable. Among those is Idemia, who publicly described how this was achieved [15]. A further algorithm, NEC-3, is on many measures, the most accurate we have evaluated. Other developers producing algorithms with stable false positive rates are Aware, Toshiba, Tevian and Real Networks. These algorithms also give false positive identiﬁcation rates that are approximately independent of the size of enrollment database. See Figure 27.

PRIOR WORK This report is the ﬁrst to describe demographic differentials for identiﬁcation algorithms. There are, however, recent prior tests of veriﬁcation algorithms whose results comport with ours regarding demographic differentials between races.

▷Using four veriﬁcation algorithms applied to domestic mugshots, the Florida Institute of Technology and its collaborators showed [23] simultaneously elevated false positives and reduced false negatives in African Americans vs. Caucasians.

▷Cavazos et al. [8] applied four veriﬁcation algorithms to GBU challenge images [32] to show order-of-magnitude higher false positives in Asians vs. Caucasians. The paper articulates ﬁve lessons related to measurement of demographic effects.

▷In addition, a recent Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Science and Technology / SAIC study [20] using a leading commercial algorithm showed that pairing of imposters by age, sex and race gives false positive rates that are two orders of magnitude higher than by pairing individuals randomly.

▷On an approximately monthly schedule starting in 2017, NIST has reported [16] on demographic effects in one-to-one veriﬁcation algorithms submitted to the FRVT process. Those tests employed smaller sets of mugshot and visa photographs than are used here.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 9

NOT DO This report establishes context, gives results and impacts, and discusses additional research that can support mitigation of observed deﬁciencies. It does not address the following:

WHAT WE DID

▷Training of algorithms: We did not train algorithms. The prototype algorithms submitted to NIST are ﬁxed and were not reﬁned or adapted. This reﬂects the usual operational situation in which face recognition systems are not adapted on customers local data. We did not attempt, or invite developers to attempt, mitigation of demographic differentials by retraining the algorithms on image sets maintained at NIST. We simply ran the tests using algorithms as submitted.

▷Analyze cause and effect: We did not make efforts to explain the technical reasons for the observed results, nor to build an inferential model of them. Speciﬁcally, we have not tried to relate recognition errors to skin tone or any other phenotypes evident in faces in our image sets. We think it likely that modeling will need richer sets of covariates than are available. In particular, efforts to estimate skin tone and other phenotypes will involve an algorithm that itself may exhibit demographic differentials.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

We did not yet pursue regression approaches due to the volume of data, the number of algorithms tested, and the need to model each recognition algorithms separately, as they are built and trained independently. Due to their ability to handle imbalanced data, we note, however, the utiltity of mixed effects models [3, 4, 9] previously developed for explaining recognition failure. Such approaches can use subject-speciﬁc variables (age, sex, race, etc.) and image-speciﬁc variables (contrast, brightness, blur, uniformity, etc.). Models are often useful, even though it is inevitable that germane quantities will be unavailable to the analysis.

▷Consider the effect of cameras: The possible role of the camera, and the subject-camera interaction, has been detailed recently [9]. This is particularly important when standardscompliant photography is not possible, or not intended, for example, in high throughput access control. Without access to human-camera interaction data, we do not report on quantities like satisfaction, difﬁculty of use, and failure to enroll. Along these lines, it has been suggested [41] that NISTs tests using standards-compliant images “don’t translate to everyday scenarios”.

In fact, we note demographic effects even in high-quality images, notably elevated false positives. Additionally, we quantify false negatives on a border crossing dataset which is collected at a different point in the trade space between quality and speed than are our other three mostly high-quality portrait datasets.

Finally, some governmental organizations dedicated resources to advancing standards so that the “real-world” images in their applications are high-quality portraits. For example, the main criminal justice application is supported by the FBI and others being proactive in the 1990s in establishing portrait capture standards, and then promulgating them.

▷Use wild images: We did not use image data from the Internet nor from video surveillance. This report does not capture demographic differentials that may occur in such photographs.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 10

RESEARCH

We now discuss research germane to the quantiﬁcation, handling and mitigation of demographic differentials.

RECOMMEND-

ATIONS

Testing: Since 2017 NIST has provided demographic differential data to developers of oneto-one veriﬁcation algorithms. Our goal has been to encourage developers to remediate the effects. While that may have happened in some cases, a prime incentive for a developer when participating in NIST evaluations is to reduce false negatives rates globally. Going forward, we plan to start reporting accuracy that pushes developers to produce approximately equal false positive rates across all demographics.

Mitigation of false positive differentials: With adequate research and development, the following may prove effective at mitigating demographic differentials with respect to false positives: Threshold elevation, reﬁned training, more diverse training data, discovery of features with greater discriminative power - particularly techniques capable of distinguishing between twins - and use of face and iris as a combined modality. These are discussed in section 9. We also discuss, and discount, the idea of user-speciﬁc thresholds.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

Mitigation of false negative differentials: False negative error rates, and demographic differentials therein, are reduced in standards-compliant images. This motivates the suggestions of further research into image quality analysis, face-aware cameras and improved standards-compliance discussed in section 8.

Policy research: The degree to which demographic differentials could be tolerated has never been formally speciﬁed in any biometric application. Any standard directed toward limiting allowable differentials in the automated processing of digitized biological characteristics might weigh the actual consequences of differentials which are strongly application dependent.

Reporting of demographic effects has been incomplete, in both academic papers and in media coverage. In particular, accuracy is discussed without specifying, particularly, false positives or false negatives. We therefore suggest that reports covering demographic differentials should describe:

REPORTING OF

DEMOGRAPHIC

EFFECTS

▷The purpose of the system - initial enrollment of individuals into a system, identity veriﬁcation or identiﬁcation:

▷The stage at which the differential occurred - at the camera, during quality assessment, in the detection and feature extraction phase, or during recognition;

▷The relevant metric: false positive or false negative occurrences during recognition, failures to enroll, failed detections by the camera, for example;

▷Any differentials in duration of processes or difﬁculty in using the system;

▷Any known information on recognition threshold value, whether the threshold is ﬁxed, and what the target false positive rate is;

▷Which demographic group has the elevated failure rates - for example by age, sex, race, height, or in some intersection thereof; and

▷Consequences of any error, if known, and procedures for error remediation.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 11

ACKNOWLE-

DGMENTS The authors are grateful to Yevgeniy Sirotin and John Howard of SAIC at the Maryland Test Facility, Arun Vemury of DHS S&T, Michael King of Florida Institute of Technology, and John Campbell of Bion Biometrics for detailed discussions of their work in this area.

The authors are grateful to staff in the NIST Biometrics Research Laboratory for infrastructure supporting rapid evaluation of algorithms.

DISCLAIMER Speciﬁc hardware and software products identiﬁed in this report were used in order to perform the evaluations described in this document. In no case does identiﬁcation of any commercial product, trade name, or vendor, imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the products and equipment identiﬁed are necessarily the best available for the purpose. Developers participating in FRVT grant NIST permission to publish evaluation results.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

ANNEXES We supplement this report with more than 1200 pages of charts contained in 17 Annexes which include exhaustive reporting of results for each algorithm. These are intended to show the breadth of the effects and to inform the algorithms’ developers. We do not take averages over algorithms, for example the average increase of false match rate in women, because averages of samples from different distributions are seldom meaningful (by analogy, taking the average of temperatures in Montreal and Miami). Applications typically employ just one algorithm, so averages and indeed any statements purporting to summarize the entirety of face recognition will not always be correct.

The annexes to this report are listed in Table 1. The ﬁrst four detail the datasets used in this report. The remaining annexes contain more than 1200 pages of automatically generated graphs, usually one for each algorithm evaluated. These are intended to show the breadth of the effects, and to inform the algorithms’ developers.

# CATEGORY DATASET CONTENT Annex 1 Datasets Mugshot Description and examples of images and metadata: Mugshots Annex 2 Datasets Application Description and examples of images and metadata: Application portraits Annex 3 Datasets Visa Description and examples of images and metadata: Visa portraits Annex 4 Datasets Border crossing Description and examples of images and metadata: Border crossing photos

Annex 5 Results 1:1 Application False match rates for demographically matched impostors Annex 6 Results 1:1 Mugshot Cross-race and sex false match rates in United States mugshot images Annex 7 Results 1:1 Application Cross-race and sex false match rates in worldwide application images Annex 8 Results 1:1 Application False match rates with matched demographics using application images Annex 9 Results 1:1 Application Cross-age false match rates with application photos Annex 10 Results 1:1 Visa Cross age false match rates with visa photos Annex 11 Results 1:1 Mugshot Cross age and country with application photos Annex 12 Results 1:1 Mugshot Error tradeoff characteristics with United States mugshots Annex 13 Results 1:1 Mugshot False negative rates in United States mugshot images by sex and race Annex 14 Results 1:1 Mugshot False negative rates by country for global application and border crossing photos Annex 15 Results 1:1 Mugshot Genuine and impostor score distributions for United States mugshots Annex 16 Results 1:N Mugshot Identiﬁcation error characteristics by race and sex Annex 17 Results 1:N Mugshot Candidate list score magnitudes by sex and race

Table 1: Annexes and their content.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 12

TERMS AND DEFINITIONS

The following table deﬁnes common terms appearing in this document. A more complete, consistent biometrics vocabulary is available as ISO/IEC 2382 Part 37.

Feature vector A vector of real numbers that encodes the identity of a person Sample One or more images of the face of a person Similarity score Degree of similarity of two faces in two samples, as rendered by a recognition algorithm Template Data produced by face recognition algorithm that includes a feature vector Threshold Any real number, against which similarity scores are compared to produce a veriﬁcation decision

DATA TYPES

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

Face detector Component that ﬁnds faces in an image Comparator Component that compares two templates and produces a similarity score Searcher Component that searches a database of templates to produce a list of candidates Template generator Component of a face recognition algorithm that converts a sample into a template; this component implicitly embeds a face detector

ALGORITHM

COMPONENTS

Imposter comparison Comparison of samples from different persons Genuine comparison Comparison of samples from the same person False match Incorrect association of two samples from different persons, declared because similarity score is at or above a threshold False match rate Proportion of imposter comparisons producing false matches False non-match Failure to associate two samples from one person, declared because similarity score is below a threshold False non-match rate Proportion of genuine comparisons producing false non-matches Veriﬁcation The process of comparing two samples to determine if they belong to the same person or not

ONE-TO-ONE

VERIFICATION

Gallery A set of templates, each tagged with an identity label Consolidated gallery A gallery for which all samples of a person are enrolled under one identiﬁer, whence N = NG Unconsolidated gallery A gallery for which samples of a person are enrolled under different identiﬁers, when N < NG Identity label Some index or pointer to an identiﬁer for an individual Identiﬁcation The process of searching a probe into gallery Identiﬁcation decision The assignment either of an identity label or a declaration that a person is not in the gallery

ONE-TO-MANY

IDENTIFICA-

TION

FMR Veriﬁcation false match rate (measured over comparison of samples) FNMR Veriﬁcation false non-match rate (measured over comparison of samples) FPIR Identiﬁcation false match rate (measured over comparison of samples) FNIR Identiﬁcation false non-match rate (measured over comparison of samples) N The number of subjects whose faces are enrolled into a gallery NG The number of samples enrolled into a gallery, NG ≥N. NNM The number of non-mated searches conducted NM The number of mated searches conducted

SYMBOLS

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 13

Contents

Acknowledgements 11

Disclaimer 11

Terms and deﬁnitions 12

1 Introduction 14

2 Prior work 18

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

3 Performance metrics 20

4 False positive differentials in veriﬁcation 28

5 False negative differentials in veriﬁcation 53

6 False negative differentials in identiﬁcation 61

7 False positive differentials in identiﬁcation 66

8 Research toward mitigation of false negatives 70

9 Research toward mitigation of false positives 71

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 14

Quality Assessment

Face Detection, Localization

Recognition

Image Capture

Attack Detection

Feature Extraction

Human Review

Acceptance

Verification Identification

FPIR 1:N “False

FMR 1:1 False

+

Alarm”

Accept

⟶Security hole

⟶False accusation

Same person or not?

⟶False lead

+Exposure

APCER Missed PA

False Assert

No detection

⟶Displaces actual lead

Low Q

FNIR 1:N “Miss

FNMR 1:1 False Rejection

⟶Security hole

Incorrect detection

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

BPCER False Assert of PA

Rate”

⟶Inconvenience

⟶Missed lead

⟶Inconvenience of recapture

⟶False accusation

-Exposure

⟶Wasted effort

on others

+ Source: http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/2016/12/07/robot-passport-checker-rejects-asian-mans-photo-having-eyes/

Figure 1: The ﬁgure is intended to show possible stages in a face recognition pipeline at which demographic differentials could, in principle, arise. Note that none of these stages necessarily includes algorithms that may be labelled artiﬁcial intelligence, though typically the detection and feature extraction modules are AI-based now.

1 Introduction

Over the last two years there has been expanded coverage of face recognition in the popular press. In some

part this is due to the expanded capability of the algorithms, a larger number of applications, lowered barriers

to algorithm development1, and, not least, reports that the technology is somehow biased. This latter aspect

is based on Georgetown [14] and two reports by MIT [5, 36]. The Georgetown work noted prior studies [22]

articulated sources of bias, and described the potential impacts particularly in a policing context, and discussed

policy and regulatory implications. The MIT work did not study face recognition, instead it looked at how well

publicly accessible cloud-based estimation algorithms can determine gender from a single image. The studies

have widely cited as evidence that face recognition is biased.

This stems from a confusion in terminology: Face classiﬁcation algorithms, of the kind MIT reported on, accept

one face image sample and produce an estimate of age, or sex, or some other property of the subject. Face

recognition algorithms, on the other hand, operate as differential operators: They compare identity information

in features vectors extract from two face image samples and produce a measure of similarity between the two,

which can be used to answer the “question same person or not?”. Face algorithms, both one-to-one identity

veriﬁcation and one-to-many search algorithms, are built on this differential comparison. The salient point, in

the demographic context, is that one or two people are involved in a comparison and, as we will see, the age,

1Gains in face recognition performance stem from well-capitalized AI research in industry and academic leading to the development of convolutional neural networks, and open-source implementations thereof (Caffe, Tensorﬂow etc.). For face recognition the availability of large numbers of identity-labeled images (from the web, and in the form of web-curated datasets [VGG2, IJB-C]), and the availability of ever more powerful GPUs has supported training those networks.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 15

sex, race and other demographic properties of both will be material to the recognition outcome.

The MIT reports nevertheless serve as a cautionary tale in two respects. First, that demographic group member-

ship can have a sizeable effect on algorithms that process face photographs; second, that algorithm capability

varies considerably by developer.

1.1 Potential sources of bias in face recognition systems

Lost in the discussion of bias is speciﬁcity on exactly what component of the process is at fault. Accord-

ingly, we introduce Figure 1 to show that a face recognition system is composed of several parts. The ﬁgure

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

shows a notional face recognition pipeline consisting of a capture subsystem, primarily a camera, followed

by a presentation attack detection (PAD) module intended to detect impersonation attempts, a quality accep-

tance (QA) step aimed at checking portrait standard compliance, then the recognition components of feature

extraction and 1:1 or 1:N comparison, the output of which may prompt human involvement. The order of the

components may be different in some systems, for example the QA component may be coupled to the capture

process and would precede PAD. Some components may not exist in some systems, particularly the QA and

PAD functions may not be necessary.

The Figure shows performance metrics, any of which could notionally have a demographic differential. Errors

at one stage will generally have downstream consequences. In a system where subjects make cooperative

presentation to the camera, a person could be rejected in the early stages before recognition itself. For example,

a camera equipped with optics that have too narrow a ﬁeld of view could produce an image of a tall individual

in which in which the top part of the head was cropped. This could cause rejection at almost any stage and a

system owner would need to determine the origin of errors.

1.2 The role of image quality

Recent research [9] has shown that cameras can have an effect on a generic downstream recognition engine.

A poor image can undermine detection or recognition, and it is possible that certain demographics yield pho-

tographs ill-suited to face recognition e.g. young children [28], or very tall individuals. As pointed out above

there is potential for demographic differentials to appear at the capture stage, that is when only a single im-

age is being collected before any comparison with other images. Demographic differentials that occur during

collection could arise from (at least) inadequacies of the camera, from the environment or “stage”, and from

client-side detection or quality assessment algorithms. Note that manifestly poor (and unrecognizable) images

can be collected from mis-conﬁgured cameras, without any algorithmic or AI culpability. Indeed, after publica-

tion of the MIT studies [5,36] on bias in gender-estimation algorithms, suspicion fell upon the presence of poor

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 16

photographs, due to under-exposure of dark-skinned individuals in that dataset. An IBM gender estimation

algorithm had been faulted in the MIT study; in response, and previously, IBM has been active in addressing

AI bias. Relevant here is that it produced a better algorithm2, and examined whether skin tone itself drove

gender classiﬁcation accuracy [30, 31] - in short, “skin type by itself has a minimal effect on the classiﬁcation

decision”.

False negatives occur in biometric systems when samples from one individual yield a comparison score below

a threshold. This will occur when the features extracted from two input photographs are insufﬁciently similar.

Recall that face recognition is implemented as a differential operator: two samples are analyzed and compared.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

So a false negative occurs when two from the same face appear different to the algorithm.

It is very common to attribute false negatives to factors such as pose, illumination and expression so much so

that dedicated databases have been built up to support development of algorithms with immunity to such3.

Invariance to such “nuisance” factors has been the focus of the bulk of face recognition research for more two

decades. Indeed over the last ﬁve years there have been great advances in this respect due to the adoption

of deep convolutional neural networks which demonstrate remarkable tolerance to very sub-standard pho-

tographs i.e. those that deviate from formal portrait standards most prominently ISO/IEC 39794-5 and its

law-enforcement equivalent ANSI/NIST ITL 1-2017.

However, here we need to distinguish between factors that are expected to affect one photo in a mated pair -

due to poor photography (e.g. mis-focus), poor illumination (e.g. too dark), and poor presentation (e.g. head

down) - and those that would affect both photographs over time, potentially including properties related to

demographics.

1.3 Photographic Standards

In the late 1990s the FBI asked NIST to establish photographic best-practices for mugshot collection4. This

was done to guide primarily state and local police departments in the capture of photographs that would

support forensic (i.e. human) review. It occurred more than a decade before the FBI deployed automated face

recognition. That standardization work was conducted in anticipation of digital cameras5 being available to

replace ﬁlm cameras that had been used for almost a century. The standardization work included consideration

of cameras, lights and geometry6. There was explicit consideration of the need to capture images of both dark

and light skinned individuals, it being understood that it is relatively easy to produce photographs for which

2See Mitigating Bias in AI Models. 3The famous PIE databases, for example. 4Early documents, such as Best Practice Recommendation for the Capture of Mugshots, 1999, seeded later formal standardization of ISO/IEC 19794-5. 5See NIST Interagency Report 6322, 1999. 6See this overview.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 17

large areas of dark or bright pixels can render detection of anatomical features impossible.

Face recognition proceeds as a differential operation on features extracted from two photographs. Accuracy

can be undermined by poor photography/illumination/presentation and by differences in those i.e. any

change in the digital facial appearance. Of course an egregiously underexposed photograph will have in-

sufﬁcient information content, but two photographs taken with even moderately poor exposure can match,

and leading contemporary algorithms are highly tolerant of quality degradations.

1.4 Age and ageing

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

Ageing will change appearance over decades and will ultimately undermine automated face recognition7. In

the current study, we don’t consider ageing to be a demographic factor because it is a slow, more-or-less grace-

ful, process that happens to all of us. However, there is at least one demographic group that ages more quickly

than others - children - who are disadvantaged in many automated border control systems either by being

excluded by policy, or by encountering higher false negatives. Age itself is a demographic factor as accuracy

in the elderly and the young differ for face recognition (usually) and also for ﬁngerprint authentication. This

applies even without signiﬁcant time lapse between two photographs.

Clearly injury or disease can change appearance on very short timescales, so such factors should be excluded,

when possible, from studies dedicated to detection of broad demographic effects. Development of equipment

and algorithms, and studies thereof, that are dedicated to the inclusive use of biometrics are valuable of course

- for example recognition of photosensitive subjects wearing sunglasses, or ﬁnger amputees presenting ﬁnger-

prints.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 18

# SOURCE IMAGE NUMBER OF DISCUSSION

SUBJECTS IMAGES

389 <1085 The study showed order-of-magnitude elevations in false positive rates in university volunteer Asian vs. Caucasian faces. The study reported FMR(T). As the study showed neither FNMR(T) nor linked error tradeoff characteristics the false negative differential is not apparent. It discusses the effect of “yoking” i.e the pairing of imposters by sex and race. It deprecates area-under-the-curve (AUC). The study used two related algorithms from the University of Maryland, one open-source algorithm [38], and one older inaccurate pre-DCNN algorithm.

1 Cavazos et al. [8] at UT Dallas

Notre Dame GBU [32] portraits

2 Krishnapriya et al. [23] at Florida Inst. Tech

Operational mugshots: Morph db [37]

10 350 African Am. + 2 769 Caucasians

42 620 African Am. + 10 611 Caucasians

The study reported: order-of-magnitude elevated false positives in African Americans vs. Caucasians; lower false negative rates in African Americans; and reduced differentials in higher quality images [23,24]. That study used three open-source algorithms, and one commercial algorithm. Two of the open-source algorithms are quite inaccurate and not representative of commercial deployment. Importantly, the study also noted the inadequacies of error tradeoff characteristics for documenting ﬁxed-threshold demographic differentials.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

3 Howard et al. [20] at SAIC/MdTF with DHS S&T

Lab collected, adult volunteers [9]

363 -The study establish useful deﬁnitions for “differential performance“ and “differential outcome” and for broad and narrow heterogeneity of imposter distributions. It showed order-of-magnitude variation in false positive rates with age, sex and race, establishing an information gain approach to formally ordering their effect. The study employed images from 11 capture devices, and applied one leading commercial veriﬁcation algorithm.

Table 2: Prior studies.

2 Prior work

All prior work relates to one-to-one veriﬁcation algorithms. This report, in contrast, includes results for many

recent, mostly commercial, algorithms implementing both veriﬁcation and identiﬁcation.

Except as detailed below, this report is the ﬁrst to properly report and distinguish between false positive and

false negative effects, something that is often missing in other reports.

The broad effects given in this report concerning age and sex have been known as far back as 2003 [35]. Since

2017, our ongoing FRVT report [16] has reported large false positive differential across sex, age and race.

Tables 2 and 3 summarize recent work in demographic effects in automated face recognition.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 19

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

# SOURCE IMAGE NUMBER OF DISCUSSION

SUBJECTS IMAGES

4 Cook et al. [9] at SAIC/MdTF with DHS S&T

Lab collected, adult volunteers

525 The study deployed mixed-effects regression models to examine dependence of genuine similarity scores on sex, age, height, eyewear, skin reﬂectance and on capture device. The report displayed markedly different images of the same people from different capture devices, showing potential for the camera to induce demographic differential performance. The study found lower similarity scores in those identifying as Black or African American, comporting with [22] but contrary to the best ageing study [3]. The study also showed that comparison of samples collected on the same day have different demographic differentials than those collected up to four years apart, in particular that women give lower genuine scores than men with time separation. Same-day biometrics are useful for short-term recognition applications like transit through an airport.

5 El Khiyari et al. [13]

Operational mugshots: Morph db [37]

724 adult, balanced on race + sex

2896 = 1448 each African Am. + Caucasians, balanced on sex

The paper used a subset of the MORPH database with two algorithms( [38], modiﬁed and one COTS) to show better veriﬁcation error rates in the men, the elderly, and in whites. The study should be discounted for two reasons: First the algorithms give high error rates at very modest false match rates: the best FNMR = 0.06 at FMR = 0.01. Second the paper reports FNMR at ﬁxed FMR, not at ﬁxed thresholds thereby burying FMR differentials. Moreover, the paper does not disclose how imposters were paired e.g. randomly or, say, with same age, race, and sex.

Table 3: Prior studies (continued).

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 20

3 Performance metrics

Both veriﬁcation and identiﬁcation systems generally commit two kinds of errors, the so-called Type I error

where an individual is incorrectly associated with another, and Type II where the individual is incorrectly not

associated with themselves.

The ISO/IEC 19795-1 performance testing and reporting standard requires different metrics to be reported

for identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation implementations. Accordingly the following subsections deﬁne the formal

metrics used throughout this document.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

3.1 Veriﬁcation metrics

Veriﬁcation accuracy is estimated by forming two sets of scores: Genuine scores are produced from mated

pairs; imposter scores are produced from non-mated pairs. These comparisons should be done in random

order so that the algorithm under test cannot infer that a comparison is mated or not.

From a vector of N genuine scores, u, the false non-match rate (FNMR) is computed as the proportion below

some threshold, T:

N X

FNMR(T) = 1 −1

i=1 H(ui −T) (1)

N

where H(x) is the unit step function, and H(0) taken to be 1.

Similarly, given a vector of M imposter scores, v, the false match rate (FMR) is computed as the proportion

above T:

M X

FMR(T) = 1

i=1 H(vi −T) (2)

M

The threshold, T, can take on any value. We typically generate a set of thresholds from quantiles of the observed

imposter scores, v, as follows. Given some interesting false match rate range, [FMRL, FMRU], we form a vector

of K thresholds corresponding to FMR measurements evenly spaced on a logarithmic scale. This supports

plotting of FMR on a logarithmic axis. This is done because typical operations target false match rates spanning

several decades 10−6 to as high as 10−2.

Tk = Qv(1 −FMRk) (3)

where Qv is the quantile function, and FMRk comes from

log10 FMRk = log10 FMRL + k

K [log10 FMRU −log10 FMRL] (4)

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 21

Error tradeoff characteristics are plots of FNMR(T) vs. FMR(T). These are plotted with FMRU →1 and FMRL

as low as is sustained by the number of imposter comparisons, M. This should be somewhat higher than the

“rule of three” limit 3/N because samples are generally not independent due to the use of the same image in

multiple comparisons.

3.2 Identiﬁcation metrics

Identiﬁcation accuracy is estimated from two sets of candidate lists: First, a set of candidate lists obtained from

mated-searches; second, a set from non-mated searches. These searches should not be conducted by randomly

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

ordering mated and non-mated searches so that the algorithm under test cannot infer that a search has a mate

or not. Tests of open-set biometric identiﬁcation algorithms must quantify frequency of two error conditions:

▷False positives: Type I errors occur when search data from a person who has never been seen before is

incorrectly associated with one or more enrollees’ data.

▷Misses: Type II errors arise when a search of an enrolled person’s biometric does not return the correct

identity.

Many practitioners prefer to talk about “hit rates” instead of “miss rates” - the ﬁrst is simply one minus the

other as detailed below. Sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2 deﬁne metrics for the Type I and Type II performance variables.

Additionally, because recognition algorithms sometimes fail to produce a template from an image, or fail to

execute a one-to-many search, the occurrence of such events must be recorded. Further because algorithms

might elect to not produce a template from, for example, a poor quality image, these failure rates must be

combined with the recognition error rates to support algorithm comparison. This is addressed in section 3.4.

3.2.1 Quantifying false positives

It is typical for a search to be conducted into an enrolled population of N identities, and for the algorithm

to be conﬁgured to return the closest L candidate identities. These candidates are ranked by their score, in

descending order, with all scores required to be greater than or equal to zero. A human analyst might examine

either all L candidates, or just the top R ≤L identities, or only those with score greater than threshold, T.

From the candidate lists, we compute false positive identiﬁcation rate as the proportion of non-mate searches

that erroneously return candidates:

FPIR(N, T) = Num. non-mate searches with one or more candidates returned with score at or above threshold

Num. non-mate searches attempted. (5)

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 22

Under this deﬁnition, FPIR can be computed from the highest non-mate candidate produced in a search - it

is not necessary to consider candidates at rank 2 and above. An alternative quantity, selectivity, accounts for

multiple candidates above threshold - see [17].

3.2.2 Quantifying hits and misses

If L candidates are returned in a search, a shorter candidate list can be prepared by taking the top R ≤L candi-

dates for which the score is above some threshold, T ≥0. This reduction of the candidate list is done because

thresholds may be applied, and only short lists might be reviewed (according to policy or labor availability, for

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

example). It is useful then to state accuracy in terms of R and T, so we deﬁne a “miss rate” with the general

name false negative identiﬁcation rate (FNIR), as follows:

FNIR(N, R, T) = Num. mate searches with enrolled mate found outside top R ranks or score below threshold

Num. mate searches attempted. (6)

This formulation is simple for evaluation in that it does not distinguish between causes of misses. Thus a mate

that is not reported on a candidate list is treated the same as a miss arising from face ﬁnding failure, algorithm

intolerance of poor quality, or software crashes. Thus if the algorithm fails to produce a candidate list, either

because the search failed, or because a search template was not made, the result is regarded as a miss, adding

to FNIR.

Hit rates, and true positive identiﬁcation rates: While FNIR states the “miss rate” as how often the correct candidate

is either not above threshold or not at good rank, many communities prefer to talk of “hit rates”. This is simply

the true positive identiﬁcation rate(TPIR) which is the complement of FNIR giving a positive statement of how

often mated searches are successful:

TPIR(N, R, T) = 1 −FNIR(N, R, T) (7)

This report does not report true positive “hit” rates, preferring false negative miss rates for two reasons. First,

costs rise linearly with error rates. For example, if we double FNIR in an access control system, then we

double user inconvenience and delay. If we express that as decrease of TPIR from, say 98.5% to 97%, then we

mentally have to invert the scale to see a doubling in costs. More subtly, readers don’t perceive differences

in numbers near 100% well, becoming inured to the “high nineties” effect where numbers close to 100 are

perceived indifferently.

Reliability is a corresponding term, typically being identical to TPIR, and often cited in automated (ﬁngerprint)

identiﬁcation system (AFIS) evaluations.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 23

An important special case is the cumulative match characteristic(CMC) which summarizes accuracy of mated-

searches only. It ignores similarity scores by relaxing the threshold requirement, and just reports the fraction

of mated searches returning the mate at rank R or better.

CMC(N, R) = 1 −FNIR(N, R, 0) (8)

We primarily cite the complement of this quantity, FNIR(N, R, 0), the fraction of mates not in the top R ranks.

The rank one hit rate is the fraction of mated searches yielding the correct candidate at best rank, i.e. CMC(N,

1). While this quantity is the most common summary indicator of an algorithm’s efﬁcacy, it is not dependent

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

on similarity scores, so it does not distinguish between strong (high scoring) and weak hits. It also ignores that

an adjudicating reviewer is often willing to look at many candidates.

3.3 DET interpretation

In biometrics, a false negative occurs when an algorithm fails to match two samples of one person −a Type II

error. Correspondingly, a false positive occurs when samples from two persons are improperly associated −a

Type I error.

Matches are declared by a biometric system when the native comparison score from the recognition algorithm

meets some threshold. Comparison scores can be either similarity scores, in which case higher values indicate

that the samples are more likely to come from the same person, or dissimilarity scores, in which case higher

values indicate different people. Similarity scores are traditionally computed by ﬁngerprint and face recog-

nition algorithms, while dissimilarities are used in iris recognition. In some cases, the dissimilarity score is a

distance possessing metric properties. In any case, scores can be either mate scores, coming from a comparison

of one person’s samples, or nonmate scores, coming from comparison of different persons samples.

The words “genuine” or “authentic” are synonyms for mate, and the word “imposters”” is used as a synonym

for nonmate. The words “mate” and “nonmate” are traditionally used in identiﬁcation applications (such as

law enforcement search, or background checks) while genuine and imposter are used in veriﬁcation applica-

tions (such as access control).

An error tradeoff characteristic represents the tradeoff between Type II and Type I classiﬁcation errors. For

identiﬁcation this plots false negative vs. false positive identiﬁcation rates i.e. FNIR vs. FPIR parametrically

with T. Such plots are often called detection error tradeoff (DET) characteristics or receiver operating charac-

teristic (ROC). These serve the same function −to show error tradeoff −but differ, for example, in plotting

the complement of an error rate (e.g. TPIR = 1 −FNIR) and in transforming the axes, most commonly using

logarithms, to show multiple decades of FPIR.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 24

3.4 Failure to extract features

During enrollment some algorithms fail to convert a face image to a template. The proportion of failures is

the failure-to-enroll rate, denoted by FTE. Similarly, some search images are not converted to templates. The

corresponding proportion is termed failure-to-extract, denoted by FTX. We do not report FTX because we

assume that the same underlying algorithm is used for template generation for enrollment and search.

In veriﬁcation, we do not need to explicitly include failure to extract rates into the FNMR and FMR accuracy

statements, because we regard any comparison that involves an image for which a failure-to-extract occurred

as producing a zero similarity score. This increases FNMR and decreases FMR. Gaming opportunities that

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

theoretically arise from this treatment of FMR are generally not of concern because the algorithm under test

does not know whether any given image will be used in genuine comparisons, imposter comparisons or both.

For identiﬁcation, we similarly incorporate failure-to-extract events into FNIR and FPIR measurements as fol-

lows.

▷Enrollment templates: Any failed enrollment is regarded as producing a zero length template. Algo-

rithms are required by the API [18] to transparently process zero length templates. The effect of template

generation failure on search accuracy depends on whether subsequent searches are mated, or non-mated:

Mated searches will fail giving elevated FNIR; non-mated searches will not produce false positives so, to

ﬁrst order, FPIR will be reduced by a factor of 1−FTE.

▷Search templates and 1:N search: In cases where the algorithm fails to produce a search template from

input imagery, the result is taken to be a candidate list whose entries have no hypothesized identities and

zero score. The effect of template generation failure on search accuracy depends on whether searches

are mated, or non-mated: Mated searches will fail giving elevated FNIR; Non-mated searches will not

produce false positives, so FPIR will be reduced.

This approach is the correct treatment for positive-identiﬁcation applications such as access control where co-

operative users are enrolled and make attempts at recognition. This approach is not appropriate to negative

identiﬁcation applications, such as visa fraud detection, in which hostile individuals may attempt to evade de-

tection by submitting poor quality samples. In those cases, template generation failures should be investigated

as though a false alarm had occurred.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 25

Developer Veriﬁcation algorithms Identiﬁcation algorithms 1 3Divi 3divi-003 3divi-004 3divi-0 3divi-3 2 Adera Global PTE Ltd adera-001 3 Alchera Inc alchera-000 alchera-001 alchera-0 4 Alivia / Innovation Sys isystems-001 isystems-002 isystems-0 isystems-3 5 AllGoVision allgovision-000 allgovision-000 6 AlphaSSTG alphaface-001 7 Ampliﬁed Group ampliﬁedgroup-001 8 Anke Investments anke-004 anke-0 anke-002 9 AnyVision anyvision-002 anyvision-004 10 Aware aware-003 aware-004 aware-0 aware-3 11 Awidit Systems awiros-001 12 Ayonix ayonix-000 ayonix-0 13 Beijing Vion Technology Inc vion-000 14 Bitmain bm-001 15 CSA IntelliCloud Technology intellicloudai-001 16 CTBC Bank Co Ltd ctbcbank-000 17 Camvi Technologies camvi-002 camvi-004 camvi-1 camvi-3 camvi-4 18 China Electronics Import-Export Corp

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

ceiec-001 ceiec-002

19 China University of Petroleum upc-001 20 Chunghwa Telecom Co. Ltd chtface-001 21 Cognitec Systems GmbH cognitec-000 cognitec-001 cognitec-0 cognitec-2 22 Cyberextruder cyberextruder-001 cyberextruder-002 23 Cyberlink Corp cyberlink-002 cyberlink-003 24 DSK dsk-000 25 Dahua Technology Co Ltd dahua-002 dahua-003 dahua-0 dahua-1 dahua-002 26 Deepglint deepglint-001 deepglint-001 27 Dermalog dermalog-005 dermalog-006 dermalog-0 dermalog-5 dermalog-6 28 DiDi ChuXing Technology Co didiglobalface-001 29 Digital Barriers digitalbarriers-002 30 Eyedea Recognition eyedea-0 eyedea-3 31 FaceSoft Ltd facesoft-000 32 FarBar Inc f8-001 f8-001 33 Gemalto Cogent cogent-003 cogent-004 34 Glory Ltd glory-001 glory-0 35 Gorilla Technology gorilla-003 gorilla-0 36 Guangzhou Pixel Solutions Co Ltd

pixelall-002 pixelall-002

37 Hengrui AI Technology Ltd hr-001 hr-002 38 Hikvision Research Institute hik-001 hik-0 hik-5 39 ID3 Technology id3-003 id3-004 40 ITMO University itmo-005 itmo-006 41 Idemia idemia-004 idemia-005 idemia-0 idemia-4 idemia-5 42 Imagus Technology Pty Ltd imagus-000 imagus-0 43 Imperial College London imperial-000 imperial-002 imperial-000 44 Incode Technologies Inc incode-004 incode-0 incode-004

Table 4: Algorithms evaluated in this report.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 26

Developer Veriﬁcation algorithms Identiﬁcation algorithms 45 Innovatrics innovatrics-004 innovatrics-006 innovatrics-0 46 Institute of Information Technologies

iit-001

47 Intel Research Group intelresearch-000 48 Intellivision intellivision-001 intellivision-002 49 Is It You isityou-000 50 Kakao Corp kakao-001 kakao-002 51 Kedacom International Pte kedacom-000 kedacom-001 52 Kneron Inc kneron-003 53 Lomonosov Moscow State University

intsysmsu-000 intsysmsu-000

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

54 Lookman Electroplast Industries lookman-002 lookman-004 55 Megvii/Face++ megvii-001 megvii-002 megvii-0 megvii-1 56 MicroFocus microfocus-002 microfocus-001 microfocus-0 57 Microsoft microsoft-0 microsoft-5 58 Momentum Digital Co Ltd sertis-000 59 Moontime Smart Technology mt-000 60 N-Tech Lab ntechlab-006 ntechlab-007 ntechlab-0 ntechlab-6 ntechlab-007 61 NEC nec-2 nec-3 62 Neurotechnology neurotechnology-005 neurotechnology-006

neurotechnology-0 neurotechnology-5 neurotechnology-007 63 Nodeﬂux nodeﬂux-001 nodeﬂux-002 64 NotionTag Technologies Private Limited

notiontag-000

65 Panasonic R+D Center Singapore psl-002 psl-003 66 Paravision (EverAI) everai-paravision-003 paravision-004 everai-0 everai-3 everai-paravision-004 67 Rank One Computing rankone-007 rankone-0 rankone-5 rankone-006 rankone-007 68 Realnetworks Inc realnetworks-002 realnetworks-003 realnetworks-0 realnetworks-2 realnetworks-003 69 Remark Holdings remarkai-001 remarkai-0 remarkai-000 70 Rokid Corporation Ltd rokid-000 71 Saffe Ltd saffe-001 saffe-002 72 Sensetime Group Ltd sensetime-002 sensetime-0 sensetime-1 sensetime-002 73 Shaman Software shaman-000 shaman-001 shaman-0 74 Shanghai Jiao Tong University sjtu-001 75 Shanghai Ulucu Electronics Technology Co. Ltd

uluface-002

76 Shanghai Universiy - Shanghai Film Academy

shu-001

77 Shanghai Yitu Technology yitu-003 yitu-0 yitu-4 yitu-5 78 Shenzhen EI Networks Limited einetworks-000 79 Shenzhen Inst Adv Integrated Tech CAS

siat-004 siat-002 siat-0

80 Shenzhen Intellifusion Technologies Co Ltd

intellifusion-001

81 Smilart smilart-002 smilart-003 smilart-0 82 Star Hybrid Limited starhybrid-001 83 Synesis synesis-005 synesis-0 84 Tech5 SA tech5-002 tech5-003 tech5-001 85 Tencent Deepsea Lab deepsea-001 deepsea-001 86 Tevian tevian-004 tevian-005 tevian-0 tevian-4 87 Thales cogent-0 cogent-3 88 TigerIT Americas LLC tiger-002 tiger-003 tiger-0

Table 5: Algorithms evaluated in this report.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 27

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

Developer Veriﬁcation algorithms Identiﬁcation algorithms 89 TongYi Transportation Technology

tongyi-005

90 Toshiba toshiba-002 toshiba-003 toshiba-0 toshiba-1 91 Trueface.ai trueface-000 92 ULSee Inc ulsee-001 93 Veridas Digital Authentication Solutions S.L.

veridas-002

94 Via Technologies Inc. via-000 95 Videonetics Technology Pvt Ltd videonetics-001 96 Vigilant Solutions vigilantsolutions-006 vigilantsolutions-007

vigilantsolutions-0

97 Visidon vd-001 vd-0 98 Vision-Box visionbox-000 visionbox-001 99 VisionLabs visionlabs-006 visionlabs-007 visionlabs-7 visionlabs-008 100 Vocord vocord-006 vocord-007 vocord-0 vocord-3 101 Winsense Co Ltd winsense-000 102 X-Laboratory x-laboratory-000 103 Xiamen Meiya Pico Information Co. Ltd

meiya-001

104 Zhuhai Yisheng Electronics Technology

yisheng-004 yisheng-0

105 iQIYI Inc iqface-000 106 iSAP Solution Corporation isap-001

Table 6: Algorithms evaluated in this report.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 28

4 False positive differentials in veriﬁcation

False positives occur in biometric systems when samples from two individuals yield a comparison score at or

above a set threshold. Most systems are conﬁgured with a threshold that is ﬁxed for all users. False positives

present a security hazard to one-to-one veriﬁcation applications. They have similarly serious consequences in

one-to-many identiﬁcation applications. For example, in applications where subjects apply for some beneﬁt

more than once under different biographic identities e.g. visa-shopping, driving license issuance, beneﬁts

fraud, an otherwise undetected false positive might lead to various downstream consequences such a ﬁnancial

loss. In a surveillance application a false positive may lead to a false accusation.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

This section gives empirical quantiﬁcation of the variation in veriﬁcation false match rates across demograph-

ics. We present results for one-to-many identiﬁcation later in section 7.

We conduct several experiments with images drawn from both domestic United States and worldwide popu-

lations.

1. One-to-one application photo cross comparison, by age, sex, country-of-birth.

2. One-to-one mugshot cross comparison by age, sex, and race.

3. One-to-one visa photo cross comparison by age.

4.1 Metrics

The metrics appropriate to veriﬁcation have been detailed in section 3.1. These are related to particular appli-

cations in Figure 2. The discussion in subsequent sections centers on false match rates at particular thresholds,

i.e. FMR(T).

4.2 False match rates under demographic pairing

It is necessary in many biometric tests to estimate false match rates. This is done by executing imposter com-

parisons, and measuring false positive outcomes at some threshold(s). Historically biometric evaluations gen-

erated imposter comparisons by randomly pairing individuals, or by exhaustively comparing all individuals.

As we will show in this section, this practice is inappropriate for evaluation of face recognition algorithms as it

underestimates false match rates that would occur in practice. The random pairing of imposters is sometimes

referred to as zero-effort pairing, mean that no effort is expended by an imposter to look like the target of the

recognition attempt.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 29

Search Photo

The enrollment sample, often not in a database (e.g. on a phone) or selected from a database by an explicit biographic claim of a identity

Automated face recognition engine evaluated as black box.

Detection and

Reference

localization

Photo

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

Feature extraction

Feature extraction

e.g. CNN model

e.g. CNN model

This grey box is the scope of NIST’s evaluation.

Comparison

Algorithm

The algorithm is given the image

Output is a similarity score, S

Threshold, T, fixed by system policy, value from

prior calibration, usually vendor-specified S ≷T

# Output Provided to 1 Score System logs 2 Decision User

NIST reports accuracy over the entire range of an

algorithms’ possible threshold values. This sweeps FMR over a range such as [0.000001, 1].

Access Control Non-repudiation

Role Afford access of a person to a physical or logical resource.

Record the presence of a specific individual

Example Door unlock. Phone unlock.

Refutation of a claim by a pharmacist that they did not dispense a particular drug, or an employer that an employee did not arrive for work.

Claim of identity Explicit claim with an identity token such as a phone, passport or ID card.

Claim with a prior login to a system.

Threshold High, to limit false positives Moderate, to prevent confederates using system

Result Acceptance decision Y/N. Logged verification decision

Human role Adjudicate failed rejections, to determine a false rejection, or detect an actual impostor attempt

Retrieve records to resolve a dispute

Intended human involvement frequency

Rare – approx. the false rejection rate identification rate plus prior probability of an actual mate

Rare – approx. the fraud rate multiplied by the false positive rate

Performance metric of interest

FNMR at low FMR. See sec. 3.1, 3.2 and Tables 10, 19 FNMR at moderate FMR.

Figure 2: Veriﬁcation applications and relevant metrics.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 30

reports/11/figures/dhs_obim/cross_country/impostors/fmr_same_same_same/imperial_002.pdf

7. Same country, sex, and age

How impostors are paired

6. Same country and age

5. Same country and sex

4. Same country

3. Same sex and age

2. Same age

1. Same sex

0. Zero effort

1e−06

2e−06

3e−06

6e−06

1e−05

2e−05

3e−05

6e−05

1e−04

2e−04

3e−04

6e−04

1e−03

2e−03

3e−03

6e−03

1e−02

2e−02

3e−02

6e−02

1e−01

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

FMR

Figure 3: For application photos, the ﬁgure shows growth in one-to-one veriﬁcation false match rates as the imposter demographic pairings are made more similar. At each level the point shows the mean FMR over all countries, age groups, and sexes. For example, in the second row “6. Same country and age” the mean is taken over 24 within-country times 5 within age-group times 4 within and cross sex FMR estimates, i.e. 480 FMR values. The blue line spans the 5-th to 95-th percentiles of the FMR estimates. The vertical line shows a nominal FMR value of 0.00003 obtained by setting the threshold on randomly associated i.e. zero-effort pairs of mugshot images.

Method: We used each veriﬁcation algorithm to compare 442 019 application images with a disjoint set of

441 517 other application images. The two sets are subject-disjoint. The subjects were born in 24 countries.

This produced 195 billion imposter scores. The images are described in Annex 2 .

The red point in the plot shows the mean of false match rates over particular sets of demographic groups.

▷Row 7: The uppermost point corresponds to the mean over 240 FMR estimates, namely those comparing

each of two sexes with each other, in each of ﬁve age-groups, and within each of 24 countries (2 x 5 x 24

= 240).

▷Row 6: As row 7, but the average is over 480 FMR estimates that now includes different sex FMR esti-

mates also.

▷Row 5: As row 7, but now the average is over 1200 FMR estimates that additionally includes all cross-age

group imposter scores.

▷Row 4: As row 7, but now the average is over 2400 FMR estimates that additionally includes all cross-age

and cross-sex imposter scores.

▷Row 3: The average is over 5760 FMR estimates that includes 242 cross-country comparisons within each

sex and age group.

▷Row 2: The average is over 11520 FMR estimates now including different sex FMR estimates also.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 31

▷Row 1: The average is over 28880 FMR estimates now including ﬁve different within-age FMR estimates

also.

▷Row 0: The average is over 57600 FMR estimates reﬂecting within- and between-group estimates for 24

countries, 5 age groups and 2 sexes (242.52.22).

The ordering of these rows is hand-crafted. Evaluators at DHS’ Maryland Test Facility developed [20] a formal

approach to showing the most inﬂuential pairing factor by quantifying information gained about FMR by

having knowledge of the demographic factors, age, sex and race.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

The ﬁgure shows how false match rates increase when imposters are drawn from increasingly similar demo-

graphics. This shows that fully zero-effort imposter pairings understate false match rates relative to the situ-

ation of a slightly more active imposters who would chose to present (stolen) credentials from subjects of the

same sex, age and ethnicity. The practice of using zero-effort imposter pairings in tests, we think, stems from

tests of ﬁngerprint algorithm that use where friction ridge structure, particularly minutiae point arrangements,

that are thought to be a developmental trait without clear genetic inﬂuence8

Note that our analysis has not so far documented whether particular demographic groups give higher false

match rates. To address this question we introduce Figure 4 which shows results similar to those above but

now for each speciﬁc country of birth.

We make the following observations:

▷Restricted pairing increases FMR: Within each country, there is a more than order of magnitude increase

in FMR between the zero-effort pair anyone-with-anyone setting, and the same-age, same-sex, same-

country pairing. This re-iterates the results of the previous section, and shows it applies globally.

▷Country-of-birth matters: For many of the different levels of demographic pairing there is between one

and two orders of magnitude between the 24 countries represented in this dataset. For example when

imposters are from the same sex and country but of any age, the algorithm gives FMR of 0.000046 on

Polish faces and 0.0024 on Vietnamese, a ﬁfty fold increase.

▷Regions with highest and lowest FMR: Across algorithms often the lowest FMR is observed in Eastern

European populations and the highest in East Asian populations. However there are important excep-

tions: Some algorithms developed in East Asia tend to give lower FMR in photos of subjects born in

East Asian countries9. This observation and the topic of demographic differentials associated with na-

8Genetic inﬂuence on friction ridge structure is known: The absence of the SMARCAD1 gene leads to absence of ﬁngerprints at birth. Further, the distance between friction ridges is smaller, on average in women than in men, and this may well be under genetic inﬂuence. The distance itself is likely not used as a biometric feature, at least not explicitly. Fingerprint pattern classes (arch, whorl etc.), however, have been shown to have regional (geographic) variations, and these were, at least historically, used in one-to-many multi-ﬁnger search strategies. 9See, for example, the ﬁgure in Annex 8 for algorithms from HIK, Dahua, Yitu, Alphaface, Deepsea Tencent, Toshiba.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 32

tional origin are covered more completely in the next section which includes results for comparison of

individuals within and across national boundaries.

Discussion: The results above show that false match rates for imposter pairings in likely real-world scenarios

are much higher than those from measured when imposters are paired with zero-effort. For this reason NIST

has been reporting “matched-covariate” accuracy results in its FRVT evaluation of face veriﬁcation algorithms

[16]. Along similar lines the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade in tests it sponsors only uses

same-sex imposter pairings. The effect of this is to raise thresholds, and thereby raise false non-march rates

also. Thresholds increase because they are determined from non-mate scores, s, via the quantile function Q, as

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

that value, T, which gives a proportion, FMR, at or above threshold:

T = Q(s, 1 −FMR) (9)

and the set of demographically matched scores is smaller than if all possible comparisons is used.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 33

Figure 4: The heatmap shows FMR for each country-of-birth, when the imposter comparisons are drawn from increasingly demographically-matched individuals. Each cell depicts FMR on a logarithmic scale. The text value is log10(FMR) with large negative values encoding superior false match rates. The center row (“0. Zero effort”) row compares individuals without regard to demographics. Rows above that pair imposters more closely until, in the second row, the imposters are of the same sex, age and country of origin. The top row corresponds to one particular demographic often associated with the highest FMR values. The rows below center pair for increasingly unlikely imposter pairings. For example “-5. Diff sex and age” shows FMR for imposters of different sex and age group. The countries appear in order of increasing mean FMR. Values below -6 are pinned to -6. Annex 8 contains the corresponding ﬁgure for all algorithms.

Nominal FMR: 0.000030

Algorithm: imperial_002

Threshold: 1.381120

Dataset: Application

log10 FMR

−1

−2

−3

−4

−5

−6

0

−2.48

−1.69

−1.81

−1.98

−2.09

−3.13

−3.33

−3.41

−3.61

−3.73

−4.24

−4.34

−4.70

−4.81

−5.27

−5.36

5_Somalia

−2.16

−2.33

−2.62

−2.61

−2.90

−3.23

−3.52

−3.52

−3.80

−3.97

−4.01

−4.18

−4.87

−5.05

−5.07

−5.24

7_Vietnam

−2.25

−2.53

−2.85

−2.80

−3.12

−3.35

−3.65

−3.63

−3.93

−4.11

−4.09

−4.27

−4.91

−5.09

−5.09

−5.27

7_China

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

−2.34

−2.58

−2.90

−2.86

−3.18

−3.44

−3.74

−3.72

−4.02

−4.21

−4.21

−4.39

−5.07

−5.27

−5.26

−5.46

7_Phillippines

−2.41

−2.54

−2.87

−2.82

−3.16

−3.44

−3.75

−3.72

−4.04

−4.23

−4.24

−4.43

−5.14

−5.33

−5.34

−5.52

7_Korea

−2.36

−2.83

−3.01

−3.05

−3.23

−3.51

−3.73

−3.79

−4.01

−4.15

−4.09

−4.22

−5.17

−5.31

−5.22

−5.36

7_Thailand

−2.57

−2.66

−2.89

−2.84

−3.10

−3.49

−3.78

−3.77

−4.05

−4.24

−4.21

−4.39

−5.37

−5.55

−5.44

−5.62

7_Japan

−2.80

−2.54

−2.71

−2.82

−2.99

−3.67

−3.89

−3.96

−4.17

−4.30

−4.47

−4.59

−5.34

−5.46

−5.57

−5.70

5_Ethiopia

−2.89

−3.01

−3.20

−3.29

−3.47

−3.93

−4.13

−4.21

−4.41

−4.53

−4.48

−4.59

−5.39

−5.49

−5.46

−5.55

5_Kenya

−2.75

−2.98

−3.30

−3.26

−3.59

−3.79

−4.11

−4.07

−4.39

−4.58

−4.55

−4.74

−5.49

−5.67

−5.63

−5.81

2_El_Salvador

Country of origin of enrollee

−2.85

−3.01

−3.16

−3.30

−3.45

−3.90

−4.10

−4.19

−4.39

−4.50

−4.49

−4.61

−5.63

−5.74

−5.72

−5.82

3_Ghana

−2.87

−3.10

−3.28

−3.38

−3.56

−3.92

−4.14

−4.21

−4.42

−4.55

−4.46

−4.59

−5.64

−5.76

−5.68

−5.80

3_Liberia

−2.80

−3.03

−3.34

−3.32

−3.62

−3.85

−4.13

−4.14

−4.41

−4.57

−4.57

−4.72

−5.55

−5.72

−5.72

−5.86

4_Haiti

−2.82

−3.10

−3.29

−3.39

−3.58

−3.91

−4.13

−4.20

−4.42

−4.56

−4.57

−4.71

−5.62

−5.74

−5.75

−5.87

reports/11/figures/dhs_obim/cross_country/impostors/heatmap_fmr_country_x_same_same/imperial_002.pdf

3_Nigeria

−2.88

−3.00

−3.32

−3.28

−3.61

−3.86

−4.17

−4.14

−4.45

−4.64

−4.63

−4.82

−5.55

−5.71

−5.75

−5.92

2_Mexico

−2.99

−3.23

−3.49

−3.51

−3.77

−3.95

−4.23

−4.24

−4.51

−4.68

−4.57

−4.74

−5.70

−5.85

−5.74

−5.90

2_Nicaragua

−2.83

−3.07

−3.36

−3.35

−3.65

−4.00

−4.30

−4.29

−4.59

−4.78

−4.84

−5.02

−5.84

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

6_India

−2.87

−3.23

−3.46

−3.52

−3.75

−4.07

−4.33

−4.36

−4.62

−4.79

−4.80

−4.97

−5.96

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

6_Pakistan

−3.00

−3.43

−3.73

−3.71

−4.01

−4.06

−4.34

−4.35

−4.62

−4.79

−4.71

−4.87

−5.75

−5.91

−5.83

−5.98

4_Jamaica

−3.14

−3.30

−3.57

−3.59

−3.86

−4.24

−4.53

−4.54

−4.82

−5.00

−5.00

−5.18

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

6_Iraq

−3.25

−3.25

−3.57

−3.55

−3.87

−4.25

−4.55

−4.54

−4.85

−5.04

−5.06

−5.24

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

6_Iran

−3.56

−4.21

−4.45

−4.45

−4.70

−4.75

−5.02

−5.03

−5.30

−5.49

−5.35

−5.53

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

1_Russia

−3.68

−4.11

−4.39

−4.39

−4.68

−4.89

−5.19

−5.17

−5.47

−5.68

−5.59

−5.79

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

1_Ukraine

−3.77

−4.06

−4.36

−4.34

−4.64

−4.93

−5.24

−5.22

−5.52

−5.73

−5.69

−5.89

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

1_Poland

+8. Same country,

female, old

+7. Same country,

sex, and age

+6. Same country

and sex

+5. Same country

and age

+4. Same country

+3. Same sex

and age

+2. Same sex

+1. Same age

+0. Zero effort

−1. Diff age

−2. Diff country

−3. Diff country

and age

−4. Diff sex

−5. Diff sex

and age

−6. Diff country

and sex

−7. Diff country,

sex, and age

How impostor is paired with enrollee

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 34

4.3 False match rates within and across countries

Method: Using high quality application portraits drawn from the corpus described in Annex 2 , we compared

442 019 images from 24 countries with 441 517 images of different individuals from the same countries, yielding

195.2 billion imposter comparisons. We executed this set of comparisons with 126 veriﬁcation algorithms

submitted to the FRVT Veriﬁcation track. These are listed in Table 4-6. We compared scores with a set of 10

thresholds to produce FMR estimates at each of those thresholds. The thresholds were computed over a set of

93 070 400 imposter comparisons made using a different set of images, namely the law enforcement mugshots

detailed in Annex 1 . Each threshold was selected as the lowest value that gave FMR at or below a target FMR.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

The target FMR value was 0.00003.

Each photograph was assigned to the age groups deﬁned by the intervals (00−20], (20−35], (35−50], (50−65],

and (65 −99].

We excluded small numbers of photographs for which country of birth was not available, or for which sex was

not listed as male or female.

Each comparison is accompanied by sex, country of birth and age group metadata for the two individuals rep-

resented in the photographs. Given many comparisons with the same demographic pairing, we can produce

a measurement of FMR when comparing individuals from two demographic groups, for example Polish men

over the age of 65 with Mexican women between 20 and 35.

Analysis: To address the issue addressed in the title of this section we produced ﬁgures depicting cross-country

false match rates. Figure 5 is an example. We restricted the demographics to just men in the largest age group,

(35−50], and then repeated that for women. We remove sex and age from the discussion for two reasons: First,

to isolate the country-of-origin effect, and, second, to reﬂect what real-world imposters would do: procure

identity credentials from persons of the same age and sex.

Figure 5 shows cross-country FMR for one of the more accurate algorithms. Annex 7 contains corresponding

ﬁgures for all algorithms, for both men and women. The annex therefore extends to more than 250 pages.

We could repeat this visualization for other age groups - the results are similar. We discuss the effect of age

itself later. Likewise, we could repeat the visualization for other recognition thresholds. The one adopted

corresponds to a FMR = 0.00003. The trends are very similar at any threshold.

The Figure shows FMR as a heatmap. It uses a logarithmic scale, so that a FMR of 0.0001 is represented by a

color and a text value of -4, i.e. log to the base 10. Low FMR values are shown in blue. High FMR values are

shown in red. A grey color connotes the target FMR value (log10 0.00003 = −4.5). High FMR values present a

security concern in veriﬁcation applications.

Discussion: From the Figure and those in the annexes, we make a number of observations. First by assigning

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 35

reports/11/figures/dhs_obim/cross_country/impostors/heatmap_fmr_country_x_country_only_male_35_50/imperial_002.pdf

Algorithm: imperial_002 Threshold: 1.381120 Dataset: Application Nominal FMR: 0.000030 Sex: M log10 FMR

−6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0

−6.00

−5.52

−6.00

−4.49

−4.64

−4.64

−5.99

−5.64

−5.74

−5.56

−5.30

−5.65

−5.49

−5.67

−5.40

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−3.22

−3.70

−3.67

−3.23

−3.13

−2.83

7_Vietnam

−6.00

−5.65

−5.87

−4.51

−4.60

−4.55

−5.55

−6.00

−5.78

−5.56

−5.32

−5.42

−5.55

−5.42

−5.33

−6.00

−6.00

−5.81

−3.35

−3.66

−3.66

−3.24

−3.14

−3.13

7_Thailand

−6.00

−5.64

−6.00

−4.34

−4.46

−4.39

−5.90

−6.00

−5.70

−5.56

−5.45

−5.53

−5.67

−5.43

−4.99

−6.00

−6.00

−5.76

−3.61

−3.95

−3.99

−2.89

−3.24

−3.21

7_Phillippines

−6.00

−5.16

−6.00

−5.28

−5.30

−5.77

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.60

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−3.27

−3.24

−2.97

−4.00

−3.63

−3.68

7_Korea

−6.00

−5.20

−6.00

−5.01

−5.03

−5.48

−6.00

−5.56

−6.00

−5.91

−5.71

−5.93

−6.00

−6.00

−5.41

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−3.44

−3.05

−3.27

−3.94

−3.67

−3.73

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

7_Japan

−6.00

−5.37

−5.96

−4.87

−4.94

−5.12

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.99

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.46

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−2.99

−3.39

−3.22

−3.62

−3.35

−3.20

7_China

−6.00

−5.74

−5.66

−4.91

−4.95

−4.81

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.95

−5.23

−5.33

−5.55

−3.90

−4.32

−4.38

−3.79

−5.85

−6.00

−6.00

−5.50

−5.50

−5.80

6_Pakistan

−5.37

−5.16

−5.14

−4.89

−4.73

−4.94

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.30

−6.00

−5.43

−4.79

−4.11

−3.77

−4.38

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

6_Iraq

−5.68

−5.18

−5.22

−5.12

−5.05

−5.17

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.84

−5.98

−6.00

−4.64

−3.86

−4.08

−4.25

−6.00

−5.77

−5.79

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

6_Iran

−6.00

−5.68

−5.94

−4.98

−5.15

−4.87

−6.00

−6.00

−5.86

−5.84

−5.25

−4.59

−5.18

−4.96

−3.58

−4.63

−4.76

−3.90

−5.42

−5.68

−5.72

−5.23

−5.33

−5.50

6_India

Demographics of impostor

−6.00

−5.65

−6.00

−5.44

−5.36

−5.39

−4.49

−4.23

−4.34

−4.19

−4.36

−2.96

−3.57

−2.17

−4.96

−6.00

−5.62

−5.46

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.86

−5.50

−5.56

5_Somalia

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.75

−5.91

−6.00

−3.88

−3.91

−3.88

−4.01

−4.12

−4.01

−3.40

−3.48

−4.90

−5.85

−6.00

−5.25

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.87

−6.00

−6.00

5_Kenya

−6.00

−5.95

−6.00

−5.08

−5.03

−5.02

−4.97

−4.74

−4.85

−4.51

−4.59

−2.88

−4.00

−2.91

−4.67

−5.79

−5.43

−5.21

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.52

−5.45

−5.63

5_Ethiopia

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.64

−5.75

−5.26

−3.94

−4.05

−3.94

−3.91

−3.93

−4.59

−4.19

−4.34

−5.51

−6.00

−5.99

−5.69

−5.94

−5.92

−6.00

−5.22

−5.32

−5.24

4_Jamaica

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.69

−5.99

−5.65

−3.67

−3.70

−3.73

−3.64

−3.91

−4.66

−3.96

−4.28

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.81

−6.00

−6.00

−5.44

−5.51

−5.37

4_Haiti

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.60

−3.37

−3.47

−3.33

−3.69

−3.94

−4.83

−3.86

−4.49

−5.98

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.87

−5.51

−5.71

3_Nigeria

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.82

−6.00

−5.66

−3.45

−3.36

−3.49

−3.72

−3.96

−4.84

−3.82

−4.41

−6.00

−5.50

−5.74

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.97

−5.67

−5.67

3_Liberia

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.89

−3.21

−3.43

−3.38

−3.67

−3.94

−4.91

−3.90

−4.60

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.74

−5.81

−5.83

−5.68

−5.86

3_Ghana

−5.84

−5.18

−5.86

−3.61

−3.65

−3.64

−6.00

−6.00

−5.63

−5.74

−5.40

−4.90

−5.66

−5.70

−4.77

−5.18

−4.99

−4.89

−5.02

−5.40

−5.62

−4.37

−4.66

−4.56

2_Nicaragua

−5.89

−5.36

−5.50

−3.41

−3.15

−3.64

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.67

−5.12

−6.00

−5.51

−5.06

−4.95

−4.76

−4.94

−4.92

−4.98

−5.39

−4.35

−4.64

−4.59

2_Mexico

−5.69

−5.44

−5.44

−3.40

−3.45

−3.61

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.66

−5.05

−6.00

−5.37

−4.98

−5.08

−4.97

−4.88

−4.94

−5.01

−5.34

−4.27

−4.52

−4.50

2_El_Salvador

−4.55

−4.68

−4.44

−5.60

−5.46

−5.78

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.32

−5.22

−5.63

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

1_Ukraine

−4.64

−4.67

−4.68

−5.47

−5.44

−5.20

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.77

−5.73

−4.99

−4.91

−5.42

−4.96

−5.07

−5.19

−5.61

−5.21

−5.20

1_Russia

−4.47

−4.71

−4.52

−5.64

−5.84

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.48

−5.58

−5.74

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

1_Poland

1_Poland

1_Russia

1_Ukraine

2_El_Salvador

2_Mexico

2_Nicaragua

3_Ghana

3_Liberia

3_Nigeria

4_Haiti

4_Jamaica

5_Ethiopia

5_Kenya

5_Somalia

6_India

6_Iran

6_Iraq

6_Pakistan

7_China

7_Japan

7_Korea

7_Phillippines

7_Thailand

7_Vietnam

Demographics of enrollee

Figure 5: For 24 countries in seven regions the ﬁgure shows false positive rates when the reference algorithm is used to compare single photos of mid-aged male subjects from the countries identiﬁed in the respective columns. The threshold is to a preset ﬁxed value everywhere. Each cell depicts FMR on a logarithmic scale. The text value is log10(FMR) with large negative values encoding superior false match rates. Annex 7 contains the corresponding ﬁgure for all algorithms.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 36

reports/11/figures/dhs_obim/cross_country/impostors/heatmap_fmr_country_x_country_only_female_35_50/imperial_002.pdf

Algorithm: imperial_002 Threshold: 1.381120 Dataset: Application Nominal FMR: 0.000030 Sex: F log10 FMR

−6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0

−5.28

−4.60

−5.61

−3.78

−4.01

−4.05

−4.86

−4.77

−4.84

−4.54

−4.78

−4.94

−4.89

−4.54

−4.73

−5.28

−5.51

−4.94

−2.75

−3.33

−3.16

−2.81

−2.66

−2.27

7_Vietnam

−5.31

−4.88

−5.76

−3.94

−4.12

−4.16

−4.94

−5.01

−4.83

−4.55

−4.86

−4.84

−4.82

−4.35

−4.83

−5.45

−5.63

−4.97

−3.02

−3.42

−3.31

−2.89

−2.71

−2.61

7_Thailand

−5.58

−4.94

−6.00

−3.75

−3.89

−3.91

−4.79

−4.80

−4.81

−4.50

−4.65

−4.67

−5.08

−4.43

−4.57

−5.31

−5.36

−4.75

−3.22

−3.73

−3.79

−2.56

−2.87

−2.75

7_Phillippines

−5.82

−4.58

−5.97

−4.83

−4.84

−5.07

−5.79

−5.55

−5.55

−5.56

−5.74

−6.00

−5.86

−5.30

−5.12

−5.36

−6.00

−5.75

−2.82

−2.83

−2.55

−3.78

−3.33

−3.16

7_Korea

−6.00

−4.60

−5.86

−4.63

−4.62

−4.96

−5.45

−5.54

−5.66

−5.48

−5.35

−5.61

−5.78

−5.43

−5.06

−5.19

−5.95

−5.59

−3.00

−2.68

−2.83

−3.74

−3.40

−3.28

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

7_Japan

−5.78

−4.52

−5.67

−4.42

−4.51

−4.73

−5.06

−5.11

−5.08

−4.89

−5.22

−5.39

−5.27

−4.85

−4.76

−5.46

−6.00

−5.48

−2.56

−3.01

−2.82

−3.24

−3.02

−2.74

7_China

−5.41

−5.33

−5.14

−3.92

−4.07

−4.03

−6.00

−5.57

−5.65

−5.27

−5.22

−4.31

−4.67

−4.13

−3.27

−3.95

−3.59

−3.08

−5.48

−5.39

−5.51

−4.80

−4.94

−4.90

6_Pakistan

−4.92

−4.62

−4.71

−4.02

−3.99

−4.15

−5.89

−5.14

−5.85

−5.93

−5.48

−4.56

−5.18

−4.36

−4.12

−3.42

−3.06

−3.62

−5.99

−5.98

−6.00

−5.52

−5.56

−5.37

6_Iraq

−5.06

−4.75

−4.87

−4.32

−4.26

−4.39

−6.00

−5.50

−6.00

−6.00

−5.82

−5.05

−5.56

−6.00

−4.37

−3.31

−3.46

−4.00

−5.72

−5.79

−5.86

−5.39

−5.49

−5.21

6_Iran

−5.84

−5.48

−5.46

−4.09

−4.28

−4.16

−5.47

−5.34

−5.59

−5.13

−4.98

−4.17

−4.75

−3.99

−3.12

−4.38

−4.11

−3.32

−5.14

−5.44

−5.39

−4.61

−4.80

−4.90

6_India

Demographics of impostor

−6.00

−5.31

−5.72

−4.50

−4.56

−4.31

−3.52

−3.48

−3.68

−3.44

−3.74

−2.45

−2.97

−1.31

−4.22

−5.62

−4.39

−4.09

−5.07

−5.25

−5.54

−4.38

−4.57

−4.58

5_Somalia

−6.00

−5.91

−5.85

−5.20

−5.19

−5.01

−3.40

−3.40

−3.47

−3.39

−3.61

−3.36

−2.90

−2.78

−4.60

−5.55

−5.09

−4.80

−5.09

−5.67

−5.63

−4.89

−4.98

−4.84

5_Kenya

−5.86

−5.17

−5.92

−4.43

−4.45

−4.33

−4.41

−4.25

−4.48

−4.08

−4.14

−2.38

−3.42

−2.42

−4.23

−5.10

−4.60

−4.42

−5.40

−5.69

−5.76

−4.65

−4.92

−4.88

5_Ethiopia

−5.99

−5.96

−5.99

−4.79

−4.95

−4.68

−3.29

−3.32

−3.38

−3.31

−3.37

−4.13

−3.61

−3.82

−4.92

−5.85

−5.53

−5.01

−5.10

−5.46

−5.53

−4.58

−4.73

−4.61

4_Jamaica

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−4.86

−5.12

−4.75

−3.05

−3.14

−3.17

−3.02

−3.29

−4.09

−3.43

−3.50

−5.06

−6.00

−5.67

−5.27

−4.91

−5.53

−5.58

−4.51

−4.62

−4.52

4_Haiti

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.09

−5.22

−5.03

−2.87

−3.03

−2.92

−3.13

−3.36

−4.46

−3.51

−3.84

−5.41

−6.00

−5.87

−5.47

−5.10

−5.65

−5.89

−4.81

−4.99

−4.77

3_Nigeria

−6.00

−5.84

−6.00

−5.15

−5.28

−4.93

−2.97

−2.92

−3.07

−3.16

−3.34

−4.42

−3.44

−3.71

−5.22

−5.18

−5.37

−5.19

−4.74

−5.31

−5.58

−4.59

−4.87

−4.63

3_Liberia

−6.00

−6.00

−5.84

−5.13

−5.17

−5.02

−2.70

−2.92

−2.89

−3.03

−3.28

−4.38

−3.47

−3.79

−5.67

−6.00

−6.00

−5.62

−5.13

−5.56

−5.85

−4.74

−4.86

−4.78

3_Ghana

−5.30

−5.07

−4.94

−3.10

−3.16

−3.20

−5.00

−5.19

−5.01

−4.68

−4.64

−4.33

−5.12

−4.56

−4.13

−4.40

−4.16

−4.01

−4.60

−4.81

−5.03

−3.81

−4.08

−3.90

2_Nicaragua

−5.13

−4.94

−4.91

−3.08

−2.96

−3.25

−5.57

−5.45

−5.38

−5.22

−5.02

−4.46

−5.39

−4.53

−4.32

−4.22

−4.03

−4.11

−4.56

−4.61

−4.84

−3.97

−4.13

−4.09

2_Mexico

−5.14

−4.84

−4.92

−2.94

−3.03

−3.14

−5.53

−5.06

−5.15

−4.81

−4.82

−4.49

−5.27

−4.50

−4.13

−4.31

−4.04

−3.94

−4.42

−4.65

−4.85

−3.76

−3.93

−3.77

2_El_Salvador

−4.24

−4.20

−4.05

−4.83

−4.99

−4.95

−5.89

−6.00

−5.85

−5.85

−5.86

−5.65

−6.00

−6.00

−5.41

−4.78

−4.64

−5.06

−5.52

−5.73

−5.89

−5.63

−5.73

−5.46

1_Ukraine

−4.35

−4.14

−4.16

−4.86

−4.92

−4.90

−6.00

−5.88

−6.00

−5.99

−5.82

−5.76

−5.46

−5.85

−5.57

−4.78

−4.63

−5.09

−4.84

−4.82

−4.70

−5.38

−5.18

−5.17

1_Russia

−4.12

−4.27

−4.24

−5.18

−5.20

−5.20

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.81

−5.14

−4.87

−5.58

−5.65

−5.78

−5.84

−5.81

−5.66

−5.40

1_Poland

1_Poland

1_Russia

1_Ukraine

2_El_Salvador

2_Mexico

2_Nicaragua

3_Ghana

3_Liberia

3_Nigeria

4_Haiti

4_Jamaica

5_Ethiopia

5_Kenya

5_Somalia

6_India

6_Iran

6_Iraq

6_Pakistan

7_China

7_Japan

7_Korea

7_Phillippines

7_Thailand

7_Vietnam

Demographics of enrollee

Figure 6: For 24 countries in seven regions the ﬁgure shows false positive rates when the reference algorithm is used to compare single photos of mid-aged female subjects from the countries identiﬁed in the respective columns. The threshold is to a preset ﬁxed value everywhere. Each cell depicts FMR on a logarithmic scale. The text value is log10(FMR) with large negative values encoding superior false match rates. Annex 7 contains the corresponding ﬁgure for all algorithms.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 37

reports/11/figures/dhs_obim/cross_country/impostors/heatmap_fmr_country_x_country_only_male_35_50/yitu_003.pdf

Algorithm: yitu_003 Threshold: 37.785000 Dataset: Application Nominal FMR: 0.000030 Sex: M log10 FMR

−6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.17

−5.54

−5.29

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.94

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−4.69

−4.93

−5.16

−4.21

−4.24

−3.96

7_Vietnam

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.09

−5.32

−5.49

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.98

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.85

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−4.80

−4.76

−4.97

−4.14

−4.09

−4.23

7_Thailand

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−4.88

−4.98

−4.96

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.66

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.02

−5.01

−5.33

−3.53

−4.09

−4.19

7_Phillippines

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−4.66

−4.26

−4.00

−5.32

−4.94

−5.11

7_Korea

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.75

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−4.74

−3.86

−4.27

−4.85

−4.85

−4.93

7_Japan

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−4.53

−4.71

−4.66

−4.93

−4.82

−4.72

7_China

−5.92

−6.00

−6.00

−5.47

−5.58

−5.27

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.63

−5.72

−6.00

−4.70

−5.02

−5.01

−4.47

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.89

−6.00

6_Pakistan

−5.52

−5.42

−5.37

−5.28

−5.20

−5.35

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.73

−6.00

−6.00

−5.62

−4.69

−4.36

−5.02

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.84

−6.00

6_Iraq

−5.75

−5.56

−5.36

−5.62

−5.44

−5.74

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.34

−4.43

−4.68

−4.93

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

6_Iran

−6.00

−5.98

−6.00

−5.49

−5.91

−5.38

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.78

−5.43

−5.79

−5.54

−4.35

−5.37

−5.57

−4.66

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.84

−6.00

−6.00

6_India

Demographics of impostor

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.62

−5.72

−5.70

−5.04

−5.03

−5.20

−4.73

−4.74

−3.38

−4.21

−2.60

−5.80

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.80

5_Somalia

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−4.49

−4.49

−4.52

−4.49

−4.57

−4.36

−3.85

−4.01

−5.43

−5.94

−6.00

−5.57

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

5_Kenya

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.23

−5.25

−5.42

−5.23

−5.23

−5.16

−4.89

−4.94

−3.20

−4.31

−3.43

−5.37

−6.00

−5.73

−5.82

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.84

−6.00

−6.00

5_Ethiopia

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.74

−5.98

−5.43

−4.49

−4.49

−4.50

−4.33

−4.25

−4.88

−4.58

−4.72

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.68

−5.86

−6.00

4_Jamaica

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.92

−5.96

−5.70

−4.23

−4.33

−4.36

−4.10

−4.30

−4.96

−4.51

−4.82

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.89

4_Haiti

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−3.93

−4.12

−3.96

−4.31

−4.47

−5.29

−4.52

−5.11

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

3_Nigeria

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−4.06

−4.03

−4.10

−4.34

−4.51

−5.37

−4.51

−5.20

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

3_Liberia

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−3.73

−4.05

−3.99

−4.21

−4.46

−5.32

−4.51

−5.17

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.98

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

3_Ghana

−5.84

−5.41

−5.63

−3.83

−3.87

−3.87

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.63

−5.82

−5.21

−5.66

−5.80

−5.26

−5.85

−5.42

−5.62

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−4.82

−5.26

−5.21

2_Nicaragua

−5.74

−5.70

−5.64

−3.73

−3.43

−3.99

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.77

−5.42

−5.94

−5.48

−5.58

−5.56

−5.19

−5.51

−6.00

−5.91

−6.00

−4.94

−5.59

−5.52

2_Mexico

−5.75

−5.48

−5.44

−3.65

−3.74

−3.86

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.79

−5.29

−6.00

−5.70

−5.62

−5.55

−5.30

−5.43

−6.00

−5.97

−6.00

−4.88

−5.31

−5.16

2_El_Salvador

−4.57

−4.74

−4.50

−5.55

−5.59

−5.67

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.56

−5.26

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

1_Ukraine

−4.76

−4.73

−4.65

−5.57

−5.51

−5.45

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.43

−5.19

−5.57

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

1_Russia

−4.49

−4.83

−4.57

−5.72

−5.70

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.72

−5.36

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

1_Poland

1_Poland

1_Russia

1_Ukraine

2_El_Salvador

2_Mexico

2_Nicaragua

3_Ghana

3_Liberia

3_Nigeria

4_Haiti

4_Jamaica

5_Ethiopia

5_Kenya

5_Somalia

6_India

6_Iran

6_Iraq

6_Pakistan

7_China

7_Japan

7_Korea

7_Phillippines

7_Thailand

7_Vietnam

Demographics of enrollee

Figure 7: For 24 countries in seven regions the ﬁgure shows false positive rates when the Chinese-developed algorithm is used to compare single photos of mid-aged male subjects from the countries identiﬁed in the respective columns. The threshold is to a preset ﬁxed value everywhere. Each cell depicts FMR on a logarithmic scale. The text value is log10(FMR) with large negative values encoding superior false match rates. Annex 7 contains the corresponding ﬁgure for all algorithms.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 38

countries into the following regions

▷1: Eastern Europe - Russia, Poland and Ukraine

▷2: Central America - Mexico, Honduras, El Salvador, Nicaragua

▷3: West Africa - Ghana, Liberia, Nigeria

▷4: The Caribbean - Haiti, Jamaica

▷5: East Africa - Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

▷6: South Asia - India, Iran, Iraq, Pakistan

▷7: East Asia - China, Japan, Korea, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam

we see a block structure, in particular a block-diagonal structure indicative of strongly correlated false match

rates within region. For example it is true that when comparing photos of individuals from East Africa with

those from Eastern Europe, most algorithms give very low FMR. The more interesting results are within-region,

around the diagonal, and between regions along the diagonal. We now note the following common trends, and

then some notable exceptions. We then conclude with some comments on what the ideal situation would be,

and on the meaning. Each Annex includes a “contact sheet” which shows all heatmaps on a single page as

thumbnails. The idea is to show macroscopic behavior across all algorithms. When viewed on a computer the

ﬁgure has very high resolution and zooming in reveals full detail; when printed it will likely just show coarse

trends.

▷Nominal FMR in Eastern Europe: For many algorithms, FMR within Eastern Europe is close to the nom-

inal target false match rate i.e. a grey color, −5 ≤log10 FMR ≤−4. There are few exceptions to this, even

for algorithms developed in China, Western Europe and the USA.

▷Higher FMR in East Africa: For almost all algorithms the highest FMR is for comparison of Somali faces.

We suspected this could be due to mislabeled data or statistical (in)signiﬁcance but rejected those possi-

bilities10. Further the FMR is high within Ethiopia and between Ethiopia and Somalia. Similarly Kenya-

Kenya comparisons give high FMR, although somewhat reduced. In a substantial majority of photos of

Somalian women, the subject is wearing full head dress that typically covers the hair and ears leaving

only the face exposed. While this might produce false positives, headwear is almost always absent in

photographs of men. Further work is needed to explain the observation in more detail.

10We discount that this result is anomalous as follows: 1. The sample size may be small for this study, but not absolutely small: The Somalia-Somalia FMR measurement is obtained from 1 733 116 comparisons involving 2632 images of 1974 males. 2. The effect persists when comparing Somalian and Ethiopian faces, and we’d suspect that ground-truth labelling errors - instances of one person being present two IDs - would not persist across national boundaries. 3. In addition to high FMR, which is a count of high imposter scores, the mean similarity score is also very high, an observation that again applies to all algorithms.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 39

▷Higher FMR in West Africa too: The countries with the second highest FMR tend to be in West Africa,

i.e. Ghana, Liberia and Nigeria. These countries do not share any borders. The high FMR values occur

almost equally within and between countries.

▷Higher FMR between West Africa and the Caribbean: Elevated FMR occurs when comparing faces of

individuals from countries in West Africa with those in the Caribbean.

▷Higher FMR between West and East Africa: Elevated FMR occurs when comparing faces of individuals

from countries in West Africa and Kenya. The effect is often lower than within either region alone.

However, the high FMR does not extend to comparisons of West African and Ethiopian or Somali faces.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

▷Higher FMR in East Asia: It is very common for algorithms to give high FMR within East Asian countries

and between them. For the algorithm shown, Vietnamese faces strongly match other Vietnamese, and

with all the other countries in the region. The East Asian block often divides into northern and southern

blocks with reduced, but still high, FMR when individuals are compared between those blocks (e.g.

Korea and Vietnam).

▷Some Chinese algorithms give nominal FMR when comparing Chinese: As shown in Annex 7 some

algorithms developed in China exhibit much reduced FMR on the East Asian population - for example,

see Figure 7. These algorithms are from Megvii, Meiya, Hik Vision, Dahua, X-Laboratory, Yitu and SHU

(Shanghai University Film Academy). For Deepsea Tencent the same applies, but less prominently in

South East Asia. In some cases the effect is only apparent for comparisons involving images of Chinese,

e.g. Star Hybrid. Other Chinese algorithms, however, exhibit the more common trend of producing

elevated FMR across East Asia. These include developers of more accurate algorithm such as Alphaface,

Deepglint and Sensetime. Thus it is not sufﬁcient for an algorithm to be developed in China for it to

mitigate the FMR increase on images from the local population.

▷One of the most accurate algorithms produces more uniform FMR: The corresponding Figure for the Yitu-

003 algorithm - Figure 7) - shows that the demographic differentials in FMR are attenuated. As noted the

FMR values for comparisons within East Asia are near the nominal value. Notably, however, this applies

to West Africa also. This appears to be an important result, as it is a proof that some algorithms do

not exhibit higher FMR in those populations. Yitu reported in a meeting in London in October 2017

that its training data included on order of 109 photographs of an unspeciﬁed (lower) number of Chinese

nationals. Whether that is the entirety of their training data is not known.

▷Developer dependency does not apply to South Asia: Neither Lookman nor Tiger IT’s algorithm produce

nominal FMR on the S. Asian imposter comparisons.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 40

▷Magnitudes are large: The East African FMR values are often two orders of magnitude higher than

the nominal value and those recorded within Eastern Europe. That is, the log10 FMR values are +2

higher corresponding to FMR that is of order 100 times larger than the de-facto baseline. From a security

perspective this is analogous to using a two-digit PIN instead of the common four digits. For West

Africa, the FMR values are between one and two orders of magnitude above baseline. A shift of 1.4 on

the logarithmic scale corresponds to a factor of 25 increase, for example.

▷Anomalies in the ﬁgures: The cross-country heatmaps for the SIAT-004, Panasonic PSL-001, and Sensetime-

002 algorithms are mostly red, indicating high false match rates for all comparisons. This may arise be-

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

cause the threshold used was computed over comparisons of a different kind of images - mugshots not

application portraits. The algorithms are told what kind of image they are being given at the time fea-

tures are extracted from the image. The consequence is that the imposter distribution for mugshots looks

different to that for the application images, and thus thresholds are not portable. This would present

an operational issue to any end-user not informed to set the threshold accordingly. In any case, while

the heatmaps are mostly red, they still exhibit the same kind of FMR variations seen for many other

algorithms.

Discussion: The heatmap ﬁgures of Annex 7 show a widespread elevation of false match rates in African

faces relative to those in Eastern Europe. The reasons for these shifts are unknown. We did not make any

attempts to explain the effects. To summarize the effect we include the scatter plots of Figures 10 - 9. Each

point corresponds to one algorithm. Its coordinates show false match rates within West Africa against those

within Eastern Europe. The degree to which the point is above the diagonal line shows the extent that FMR in

the African countries exceeds that in the Eastern European ones.

We note several outcomes of this visualization.

▷Worst case In the scatter plot for African women Figure 9 there is a cluster of algorithms located near

x = 0.00012 and y = 0.003. Compared to the target FMR value of 0.00003 (the vertical line) there is a near

four-fold increase in FMR of women over men. Much more signiﬁcantly there is a more than 100-fold

vertical excursion from white men to African women.

▷Dispersion Some algorithms, most notably those from Sensetime give FMR much different to the target

value. The threshold was set using Annex 1 mugshots but the Figure reﬂects FMR measured over

comparison of Annex 2 application photos. Both sets of photos are well illuminated portraits, so this

instability across datasets would be unwelcome, especially if an algorithm were to be ﬁelded on imagery

qualitatively different. Many algorithms do give the expected FMR for white men FMR = 0.00003 as seen

in Figure 8.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 41

Figures 10 and 11 repeat the scatterplot summaries for the East Asian demographic too. The picture there is

more interesting. While the same pattern is present, it is clear that some algorithms developed in China do

not give elevated false match rates relative to Eastern Europeans. The absence of the effect is important in

that it implies high FMR in that population is not inevitable. We did not see a corresponding improvement

for South Asian faces for the few algorithms we understand were submitted by developers there (in India and

Bangladesh).

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 42

5e−02

G

siat_4

T set for FMR = 0.000030 in US mugshots of white men

G

sensetime_1

3e−02

G

sensetime_2

2e−02

1e−02

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

8e−03

G

bm_1

Dataset: Application Photos

G

plifiedgroup_1

5e−03

G

saffe_1

3e−03

G

camvi_4

False match rate in men within W. Africa

AU BG CH CN DE ES FR ID IN IS JP KR LI PT RU SG SK TW UK USA

G

videonetics_1

G G

cognitec_1 cognitec_0

G

G

lookman_2

2e−03

G

vigilantsolutions_7

G

tiger_2

G

G

microfocus_1

G

tevian_4

G

aware_3

G

rankone_7

G

intellifusion_1

G

dsk_0

G

ntechlab_6

G

G

iit_0

G G

gorilla_2 cyberextruder_2

G

hik_1

G

vigilantsolutions_6

G

imperial_0

G

siat_2

G

starhybrid_1

G

rankone_6

G

G

G G

glory_1

microfocus_2 shaman_1

G

adera_1

G

3divi_3

G

tiger_3

1e−03

G

G

glory_0

G

aware_4

G G

itmo_5 megvii_1

8e−04

G

G G ulsee_1

id3_4

G

kakao_2

G G

neurotechnology_6 cogent_3

G

intellivision_2

G

G G

cogent_4 idemia_4

id3_3

G

meiya_1

G

G

anyvision_2

G

anyvision_4

G

ntechlab_7

G

intelresearch_0

G

visionlabs_7

G

uluface_2

G

itmo_6

G

ceiec_2

G

3divi_4

G

toshiba_3

G G G

visionbox_0

G

facesoft_0

G

G

innovatrics_4

digitalbarriers_2

G

5e−04

G

dahua_2

G

visionlabs_6

G G G G

G G GG

isystems_1alchera_0

kneron_3 smilart_3

G

allgovision_0

toshiba_2

G

ctbcbank_0

G

isap_1

isystems_2

shu_1gorilla_3

G

G

G

camvi_2

G

via_0

dahua_3

G

remarkai_1

G

intsysmsu_0

G

visionbox_1

G

synesis_4

G

G

G G

alchera_1

psl_2

everai_paravision_3

vion_0

iit_1

G

cyberlink_2

G G

dermalog_5 dermalog_6

G G

neurotechnology_5 einetworks_0

G

nodeflux_2

G

remarkai_0

G

winsense_0

G

pixelall_2

G G G

G

realnetworks_2 imagus_0 realnetworks_3

saffe_2

G

innovatrics_6

G

deepglint_1

everai_2

G

upc_1

G G

f8_1

G

mt_0

G

G

rokid_0

G

imperial_2

G

G G

intellicloudai_1

veridas_1 veridas_2

G

megvii_2

G

incode_4

anke_4

G

vocord_6

G

tongyi_5

G

G

lookman_4

ceiec_1

G

x−laboratory_0

G

kedacom_0

G

synesis_5

G

tech5_2

3e−04

G

G

G

incode_3

G

hr_1

G

anke_3

G

yisheng_4

G

alphaface_1

G

deepsea_1

G

2e−04

G

tech5_3

G

G

G

vocord_7

G

yitu_3

G

1e−04

G

G

nodeflux_1

8e−05

G

G

G

5e−05

3e−05

2e−05

1e−05

8e−06

G

chtface_1

1e−06 3e−06 5e−06 1e−05 3e−05 5e−05 1e−04 3e−04 5e−04 1e−03 3e−03 5e−03 1e−02 False match rate in men within E. Europe

Figure 8: The scatter plot shows FMR when comparing same-age men within and across three Eastern European countries (Russia, Ukraine, Poland), against FMR obtained comparing men within and across three West African countries (Ghana, Liberia, Nigeria). The threshold is ﬁxed for each algorithm to give the FMR noted in the annotation over white men in the U.S. mugshot database. This is indicated by the vertical and horizontal green lines. The blue diagonal line y = x is included to show “over/under”. The color code identiﬁes the domicile of the developer - some multinationals conduct research elsewhere. Training data likewise may originate elsewhere.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 43

1e−01

G

siat_4

T set for FMR = 0.000030 in US mugshots of white men

8e−02

G

sensetime_2

G

sensetime_1

5e−02

3e−02

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

2e−02

Dataset: Application Photos

1e−02

G

camvi_4

8e−03

G

vigilantsolutions_7

False match rate in women within W. Africa

G

vigilantsolutions_6

G

intelresearch_0

AU BG CH CN DE ES FR ID IN IS JP KR LI PT RU SG SK TW UK USA

G

G

tiger_2

5e−03

G

lookman_2

G

aware_4

G

rankone_7

G

G

lookman_4

G

aware_3

G G

cogent_4 idemia_4

G G

intellifusion_1 starhybrid_1

G

neurotechnology_6

G

meiya_1

G

tiger_3

G G

cognitec_1 cognitec_0

G

G

gorilla_2

G

G G

intellicloudai_1 alchera_1

yisheng_4

GG GG

remarkai_1 itmo_5 megvii_1

G G

visionlabs_7

G G

incode_4

G

anyvision_2

G

innovatrics_4

G

G

winsense_0

G G

rankone_6 rokid_0

cogent_3

G G G G

G

iit_1 isystems_1 alchera_0

G G

everai_paravision_3

einetworks_0

GG

G G

saffe_2

G

id3_4

mt_0

G

psl_2

G G

G G G G

toshiba_3 toshiba_2

allgovision_0 visionbox_0

G

nodeflux_2

G

ulsee_1

visionbox_1

visionlabs_6

G G G

upc_1

3e−03

cyberlink_2

remarkai_0

G

G G G

camvi_2 f8_1 anke_4

G G G

id3_3

G

kakao_2

pixelall_2

G

isystems_2

G

3divi_3

neurotechnology_5

G G

G

uluface_2

ntechlab_6 everai_2

G

via_0

kneron_3 smilart_3

G

intsysmsu_0

x−laboratory_0 siat_2

G

G G

dermalog_6 itmo_6

intellivision_2

G

vion_0

G

adera_1

isap_1 dsk_0

G

incode_3

G

3divi_4

G

innovatrics_6

kedacom_0

G

synesis_4

G

vocord_6

G

G G

ctbcbank_0

G

hr_1 tevian_4

digitalbarriers_2

G

G

synesis_5

G

imagus_0

G

hik_1

G

anyvision_4

G

alphaface_1

G

cyberextruder_2

G

ntechlab_7

G

gorilla_3

2e−03

G

G

dahua_3

G

tech5_2

G

iit_0

G

G

deepglint_1

imperial_0

G

shu_1

G

dahua_2

G

ceiec_2

G

saffe_1

G

G

anke_3

G

shaman_1

G

G

bm_1

G G

imperial_2 facesoft_0

G

1e−03

G

microfocus_2

G

glory_1

G

megvii_2

G

8e−04

G

G

dermalog_5

G

glory_0

G

veridas_1

G

deepsea_1

G

G

tech5_3

G

microfocus_1

G

vocord_7

G

veridas_2

5e−04

G

G

realnetworks_2

G

tongyi_5

G

ceiec_1

G

realnetworks_3

G

G

3e−04

G

yitu_3

G

G

2e−04

G

G

videonetics_1

G

G

1e−04

G

amplifiedgroup_1

8e−05

5e−05

G

chtface_1

3e−05

2e−05

G

nodeflux_1

1e−06 3e−06 5e−06 1e−05 3e−05 5e−05 1e−04 3e−04 5e−04 1e−03 3e−03 5e−03 1e−02 False match rate in women within E. Europe

Figure 9: The scatter plot shows FMR when comparing same-age women within and across three Eastern European countries (Russia, Ukraine, Poland), against FMR obtained comparing women within and across three West African countries (Ghana, Liberia, Nigeria). The threshold is ﬁxed for each algorithm to give the FMR noted in the annotation over white men in the U.S. mugshot database. This is indicated by the vertical and horizontal green lines. The blue diagonal line y = x is included to show “over/under”. The color code identiﬁes the domicile of the developer - some multinationals conduct research elsewhere. Training data likewise may originate elsewhere.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 44

G

sensetime_1

G

siat_4

1e−02

T set for FMR = 0.000030 in US mugshots of white men

G

sensetime_2

G

shaman_1

8e−03

G

iit_0

5e−03

G

camvi_4

G

rankone_6

G

vigilantsolutions_6

G

rankone_7

G

digitalbarriers_2

3e−03

G

dermalog_5

G

aware_4

G

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

G

tiger_2

vigilantsolutions_7

2e−03

G

yisheng_4

Dataset: Application Photos

G

aware_3

G

saffe_1

G

ceiec_1

1e−03

G

ntechlab_6

G

facesoft_0

G

plifiedgroup_1

8e−04

G

3divi_3

G

imperial_2

G G

intellivision_2

innovatrics_4

G

tech5_2

G

tevian_4

G

smilart_3

G

anyvision_2

G

False match rate in men within E. Asia

veridas_1

G G

cognitec_1 cognitec_0

AU BG CH CN DE ES FR ID IN IS JP KR LI PT RU SG SK TW UK USA

5e−04

G

veridas_2

G

G

intellicloudai_1

G

3divi_4

G

videonetics_1

G

tech5_3

G

G

toshiba_3

G

innovatrics_6

G

microfocus_2

G

gorilla_3

G

tiger_3

G

gorilla_2

G

everai_2

G

synesis_5

G

alchera_0

G

G

itmo_5

G

intelresearch_0

G

rokid_0

3e−04

G

ulsee_1

G G

neurotechnology_6 cogent_3

G G

G

winsense_0

cyberextruder_2

G G

neurotechnology_5

G G G GG

G

alchera_1

pixelall_2

G

intsysmsu_0

G

toshiba_2

G

ctbcbank_0

G G

camvi_2 f8_1

G G

cogent_4 idemia_4

G

id3_3

G

kneron_3

G G G

G

mt_0 anyvision_4

alphaface_1

G G G

isystems_2 iit_1 isystems_1

GG

visionbox_1 saffe_2

cyberlink_2

G G

remarkai_0 remarkai_1

G

bm_1

einetworks_0

G

dermalog_6

anke_3 vion_0 allgovision_0 visionbox_0

G

imagus_0

G

psl_2

G

synesis_4

G

via_0

G

nodeflux_2

G

id3_4

G

isap_1

G

G

ntechlab_7

2e−04

G G

vocord_7 vocord_6

G

realnetworks_2

G

intellifusion_1

G

G

realnetworks_3

G

visionlabs_7

G

microfocus_1

G

G

G

deepglint_1

glory_0

G

anke_4

G

imperial_0

G

starhybrid_1

G

hr_1

G

G

ceiec_2

G

glory_1

1e−04

G

dahua_3

G

G

visionlabs_6

8e−05

G

incode_4

G

lookman_4

G

yitu_3

G

itmo_6

G

G

uluface_2

G

siat_2

G

deepsea_1

G

G

lookman_2

5e−05

G

hik_1

G

G

tongyi_5

G

dahua_2

G

everai_paravision_3

G

kakao_2

G

3e−05

G

kedacom_0

G

G

x−laboratory_0

G

2e−05

G

G

megvii_2

G

G

incode_3

G

1e−05

G

8e−06

G

G

upc_1

5e−06

G

shu_1

G

chtface_1

G

meiya_1

3e−06

G

nodeflux_1

2e−06

G

megvii_1

1e−06

G

G

adera_1

dsk_0

8e−07

1e−06 3e−06 5e−06 1e−05 3e−05 5e−05 1e−04 3e−04 5e−04 1e−03 3e−03 5e−03 1e−02 False match rate in men within E. Europe

Figure 10: The scatter plot shows FMR when comparing same-age men within and across three Eastern European countries (Poland, Russia, Ukraine), against FMR obtained comparing men within and across six East Asian countries (China, Japan, Korea, Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam). The threshold is ﬁxed for each algorithm to give the FMR noted in the annotation over white men in the U.S. mugshot database. This is indicated by the vertical and horizontal green lines. The blue diagonal line y = x is included to show “over/under”. The color code identiﬁes the domicile of the developer - some multinationals conduct research elsewhere. Training data likewise may originate elsewhere.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 45

3e−02

2e−02

G

siat_4

G

sensetime_1

T set for FMR = 0.000030 in US mugshots of white men

G

sensetime_2

G

camvi_4

1e−02

G

shaman_1

8e−03

G

vigilantsolutions_6

G

iit_0

G

rankone_7

G

yisheng_4

G

rankone_6

5e−03

G

vigilantsolutions_7

G

tiger_2

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

G

aware_4

G

digitalbarriers_2

3e−03

G

aware_3

Dataset: Application Photos

G

dermalog_5

G

3divi_3

G G

innovatrics_4 intellivision_2

2e−03

G

anyvision_2

G

gorilla_3

G G

imperial_2 facesoft_0

G

saffe_1

G

intellicloudai_1

G

smilart_3

G

ceiec_1

G

tiger_3

G

3divi_4

G

alchera_0

G

idemia_4

G G

ntechlab_6 everai_2

G

innovatrics_6

G

kneron_3

G

rokid_0

G

G

neurotechnology_6

id3_3

G

gorilla_2

G

neurotechnology_5

G

amplifiedgroup_1

G

alchera_1

G

G G

G

videonetics_1

cognitec_1 cognitec_0

toshiba_3

G G G G GG G

winsense_0 alphaface_1

G G

cogent_3 cogent_4

1e−03

G

ctbcbank_0

G GG G

G

synesis_5

GG

G

remarkai_0 remarkai_1

imagus_0

psl_2

G

f8_1

G

veridas_1

G G G

pixelall_2

isystems_2iit_1 isystems_1

vion_0 allgovision_0 visionbox_0

False match rate in women within E. Asia

G

cyberlink_2

G

dermalog_6

visionbox_1 saffe_2 camvi_2

G

G

einetworks_0

mt_0

G

G

via_0

tech5_2

G

intsysmsu_0

G

tevian_4

G

microfocus_2

G

cyberextruder_2

G G

G

ulsee_1 synesis_4

veridas_2

anke_3

G

toshiba_2

8e−04

G

id3_4

G

nodeflux_2

G

intelresearch_0

AU BG CH CN DE ES FR ID IN IS JP KR LI PT RU SG SK TW UK USA

G

G

vocord_6

G

isap_1

G

tech5_3

G

G

anyvision_4

5e−04

G

vocord_7

G

G

visionlabs_7

anke_4

G

itmo_5

G

G

G

ntechlab_7

hr_1

G

3e−04

G

microfocus_1

G

G

intellifusion_1

ceiec_2

G

G

incode_4

G

imperial_0

G

visionlabs_6

G

deepglint_1

G

dahua_3

G

G

uluface_2

G

glory_1

2e−04

G

lookman_4

G

itmo_6

G

G

lookman_2

G

yitu_3

G

glory_0

G

siat_2

G

starhybrid_1

G

G

realnetworks_2

G

x−laboratory_0

G

bm_1

G

G

everai_paravision_3

G G

realnetworks_3 kakao_2

G

dahua_2

G

hik_1

1e−04

G

deepsea_1

G

8e−05

G

tongyi_5

G

kedacom_0

G

G

incode_3

G

5e−05

G

megvii_2

G

G

3e−05

G

G

G

2e−05

shu_1

G

G

upc_1

G

G

chtface_1

G

meiya_1

G

1e−05

G

megvii_1

G

8e−06

5e−06

G

dsk_0

3e−06

G

nodeflux_1

2e−06

1e−06

G

adera_1

8e−07

1e−06 3e−06 5e−06 1e−05 3e−05 5e−05 1e−04 3e−04 5e−04 1e−03 3e−03 5e−03 1e−02 False match rate in women within E. Europe

Figure 11: The scatter plot shows FMR when comparing same-age women within and across three Eastern European countries (Poland, Russia, Ukraine), against FMR obtained comparing women within and across six East Asian countries (China, Japan, Korea, Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam). The threshold is ﬁxed for each algorithm to give the FMR noted in the annotation over white men in the U.S. mugshot database. This is indicated by the vertical and horizontal green lines. The blue diagonal line y = x is included to show “over/under”. The color code identiﬁes the domicile of the developer some multinationals conduct research elsewhere. Training data likewise may originate elsewhere.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 46

−6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0 Dataset: MUGSHOTS log10 FMR

imperial_002 yitu_003

−4.0

−4.0

M−White

−3.6

−4.9

−3.8

−5.1

M−Black

Demographics of impostor

−3.3

−4.5 −4.3

−3.8

−4.7 −4.4

M−Asian

−2.3

−3.6

−4.6

−3.7

−2.6

−3.9

−4.7

−3.8

M−Am. Indian

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

−3.7

−4.7

−5.5

−6.0

−5.1

−3.7

−4.8

−5.7

−6.0

−4.9

F−White

−3.0

−4.6

−5.1

−5.1

−4.4

−5.4

−3.5

−4.7

−5.4

−5.3

−4.8

−5.8

F−Black

−2.9

−4.1 −4.1

−4.3

−4.4

−4.8

−6.0

−3.6

−4.2 −4.6

−4.6

−4.9

−6.0

−5.1

F−Asian

−2.2 −3.1

−3.2

−4.1

−3.5

−4.4

−5.2

−4.6

−2.6 −3.5

−3.8

−4.5

−3.6

−4.9

−5.5

−5.1

F−Am. Indian

F−Am. Indian

F−Asian

F−Black

F−White

M−Am. Indian

M−Asian

M−Black

M−White

F−Am. Indian

F−Asian

F−Black

F−White

M−Am. Indian

M−Asian

M−Black

M−White

Demographics of enrollee

Figure 12: For mugshot photos tagged with one of four race labels and a sex label, the heatmaps show false positive rates for comparison of randomly selected photos from the groups identiﬁed in the respective rows and columns. Two algorithms are used, one in each panel, and the threshold for each is set to a ﬁxed value everywhere. The value is the smallest threshold that gives FMR ≤0.0001 on the white male imposters. Each cell depicts FMR on a logarithmic scale. The text value is log10(FMR) with large negative values encoding superior false match rates. Annex 6 contains the corresponding ﬁgure for all algorithms.

4.4 Dependence of FMR on race in United States mugshots

Method: Using high quality mugshot portraits from the mugshot images detailed Annex 1 , we apply each

veriﬁcation algorithm to conduct 3 million comparisons for each of the eight demographics deﬁned by two

sexes and four races. The origin and meaning of these labels is described in the Annex. We executed this set

of comparisons with 126 veriﬁcation algorithms submitted to the FRVT Veriﬁcation track. These are listed in

Tables 4-6. We compared scores with a threshold to produce FMR estimates for each demographic pairing.

Each threshold was selected as the lowest value that gave FMR at or below a target FMR. The target FMR

value was 0.0001. The threshold was computed over the set of 3 000 000 mugshot imposter comparisons made

for white males. Thus, by design, the FMR for that demographic is exactly 0.0001.

We excluded photographs for which race or sex was unavailable or unknown. We did not report comparisons

by age-group.

Analysis: As with the international set of application photos, we use the heatmap to show cross-demographic

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 47

false match rates, including cross-sex. Heatmaps for two algorithms are shown in Figure 12. The Figure shows

FMR as a heatmap. It uses a logarithmic scale, so that a FMR of 0.0001 is represented by a color and a text

value of -4, i.e. log to the base 10. Low FMR values are shown in blue. High FMR values are shown in red. A

grey color connotes the target FMR value (log10 0.0001 = −4). High FMR values present a security concern in

veriﬁcation applications. Corresponding ﬁgures for all algorithms appear in Annex 6

Figure 13 extracts the within-sex and within-race diagonal elements of those ﬁgures and summarizes the results

for all algorithms, ordering the result by worst-case FMR elevation.

Discussion: From the ﬁgure, and those in the annex, we make a number of observations.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

▷Higher FMR in women: As with application photos, most algorithms give systematically higher false

match rates in women than in men. The magnitude of this difference is lower with mugshots than with

application photos.

▷Highest FMR in American Indians: First, the highest FMR occurs in images of American Indians11. For

the Imperial-002 algorithm featured in Figure 12 the FMR for American Indian women is 0.0068, i.e. a

68 fold increase over the FMR of 0.0001 in white males. In men, the multiple is 47. Why such large

increases occur is not known. One component of the increase may stem from database identity labelling

errors12. We discount this possibility because the database has otherwise excellent ground-truth integrity,

supported by ﬁngerprint enrollments.

▷Higher FMR in Asian and Black women: There are order-of-magnitude increases in FMR in mugshots

of Asian and Black women. Some algorithms developed in China reduce this differential, for example

Yitu-003 in the right panel of Figure 12.

11The data supplied to NIST tags this group with letter “I” per the EBTS standard which describes this group as “American Indian, Eskimo, Alaskan native, or a person having origins in any of the 48 contiguous states of the United States or Alaska who maintains cultural identiﬁcation through tribal afﬁliation or community recognition”. In the ﬁgures we replace the letter “I” with “American Indian” to distinguish from subjects from India in the international datasets. 12Speciﬁcally instances of “one person under two IDs” can cause apparent false positives, that are actually true positives.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 48

F M

videonetics_001

G G G G

G G G G

isap_001 amplifiedgroup_001

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

incode_003 alchera_000

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

alchera_001

G G G G

G G G G

aware_004 incode_004 innovatrics_006

GG G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G GG G

GGG G

idemia_004 intsysmsu_000

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

GG G G

isystems_001 cyberlink_002

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

camvi_002 gorilla_003 neurotechnology_006

G G G G

G G G G

GG G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

iit_001 kneron_003 ctbcbank_000 visionbox_001

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

3divi_004 nodeflux_002 innovatrics_004

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

facesoft_000 intellivision_002

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

f8_001 3divi_003 everai_paravision_003

G G G G

G G G G

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

G G G G

GG G G

G G G G

G G G G

toshiba_003 imperial_002

G G G G

G G G G

GG G G

G G G G

everai_002 synesis_005

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

psl_002 via_000 imagus_000 allgovision_000

G G G G

G G G G

Developed Elsewhere Developed in China

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

aware_003 intellivision_001

GG G G

G G G G

G GG G

G G G G

id3_004 toshiba_002 visionbox_000

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

erace

itmo_006 lookman_002 visionlabs_007

G G G G

GG G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

vocord_006 cogent_003 rankone_007 intelresearch_000

G G G G

G G G G

Asian

G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

False match rate

G G G G

GG G G

anyvision_002 cyberextruder_001

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

Black

kakao_002 cyberextruder_002

G

G GG G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

smilart_003

G G G G

G G G G

imperial_000 vigilantsolutions_007

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

Indian

visionlabs_006

G G G G

G G G G

G

cogent_004 vigilantsolutions_006

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

tevian_004 camvi_004 cognitec_001 ntechlab_007

G G G G

GG G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

White

G

G G G G

G G G G

itmo_005 lookman_004 cognitec_000

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

GG G G

G G G G

G G G G

tech5_002

G G G G

GG G G

iit_000 tech5_003 anyvision_004

G G G G

G G G G

GG G G

GG G G

G G G G

G G G G

tevian_005 ntechlab_006

G G G G

G G G G

G G G

G G G G

shaman_001

G G G G

G G G G

adera_001 realnetworks_003

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

yisheng_004

G G G G

G G G G

hr_001 remarkai_000 remarkai_001 alphaface_001

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

mt_000 anke_004

G G G G

G G G

G G G G

G G G G

pixelall_002

G G G G

G G G G

uluface_002

G G G G

G G G G

winsense_000

G G G G

G G G G

ulsee_001 einetworks_000 x−laboratory_000

G G G G

GG G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

anke_003 intellicloudai_001

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

vion_000 iqface_000

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

siat_002 upc_001 dahua_003

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

shu_001 sjtu_001 yitu_003 deepsea_001

G G G G

G G G G

GG G G

GG G G

G G G G

GG G G

G G G G

G G G G

hik_001 tongyi_005

GG G G

G G G G

G G G G

G G G G

dsk_000 ceiec_002

G G G G

GG G G

G G G G

G G GG

intellifusion_001

G G G G

G G G G

3e−05 1e−04 3e−04 1e−03 3e−03 1e−02 3e−02 3e−05 1e−04 3e−04 1e−03 3e−03 1e−02 3e−02

Algorithm

Figure 13: For each veriﬁcation algorithm, the dots give the false match rates for same-sex and same-race imposter comparisons. The threshold is set for each algorithm to give FMR = 0.0001 on white males (the purple dots in the right hand panel). The algorithms are sorted in order of worst case FMR, usually for American Indian women. Algorithms developed in China appear in the lower panel.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 49

reports/11/figures/dhs_obim/cross_country/impostors/heatmap_fmr_age_x_age_special_country/imperial_002.pdf

1_Poland 2_Mexico 6_India 5_Kenya 3_Nigeria 7_China

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.22

−4.84

−5.92

−6.00

−4.89

−4.15

−3.52

−6.00

−5.82

−5.91

−4.55

−3.82

−6.00

−6.00

−4.53

−3.85

−3.04

−6.00

−5.57

−4.87

−3.95

−3.06

−5.10

−5.19

−4.36

−3.34

−2.77

(65−99]

Algorithm: imperial_002 Threshold: 1.381120 Dataset: Application Nominal FMR: 0.000030

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−5.78

−5.68

−5.43

−5.20

−4.68

−4.30

−4.26

−6.00

−5.50

−5.41

−4.57

−4.32

−4.98

−5.42

−4.72

−4.02

−3.63

−5.75

−5.36

−4.71

−4.21

−3.68

−4.95

−4.72

−4.05

−3.49

−3.37

(50−65]

Male−Female Male−Male Female−Female

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−4.73

−4.76

−4.59

−4.73

−5.29

−4.97

−4.99

−5.02

−5.19

−5.48

−4.25

−4.72

−4.53

−4.45

−4.93

−5.43

−5.00

−4.79

−4.72

−4.52

−4.72

−4.46

−4.13

−4.21

−4.62

(35−50]

−5.53

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−4.32

−4.70

−5.17

−5.90

−6.00

−4.48

−4.91

−5.16

−5.99

−6.00

−3.90

−4.57

−4.76

−5.00

−5.36

−4.92

−4.92

−5.09

−5.36

−5.36

−4.11

−4.18

−4.50

−4.95

−5.45

(20−35]

log10 FMR

−5.15

−5.71

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−3.87

−4.58

−5.36

−6.00

−6.00

−3.66

−4.95

−5.61

−6.00

−6.00

−3.24

−4.33

−5.22

−6.00

−6.00

−4.40

−4.90

−5.25

−5.78

−6.00

−3.48

−4.11

−4.86

−5.23

−6.00

(12−20]

0

−6.00

−6.00

−5.27

−4.40

−4.04

−6.00

−5.19

−4.08

−3.23

−2.84

−6.00

−5.59

−4.67

−3.59

−3.04

−6.00

−4.98

−4.27

−3.26

−2.74

−6.00

−4.87

−4.07

−3.19

−2.61

−5.33

−4.72

−3.71

−2.70

−2.27

(65−99]

−1

−6.00

−5.59

−4.86

−4.22

−4.31

−5.22

−4.26

−3.37

−3.07

−3.20

−5.51

−4.70

−4.05

−3.51

−3.56

−6.00

−4.32

−3.60

−3.31

−3.17

−5.18

−4.12

−3.50

−3.10

−3.14

−4.70

−3.96

−3.18

−2.68

−2.72

(50−65]

Age group

−6.00

−4.78

−4.47

−4.70

−5.02

−4.24

−3.53

−3.15

−3.36

−3.98

−4.76

−3.74

−3.58

−4.04

−4.79

−4.41

−3.57

−3.40

−3.61

−3.86

−4.63

−3.65

−3.33

−3.44

−3.91

−3.88

−3.27

−2.99

−3.13

−3.73

−2

(35−50]

−5.00

−4.51

−4.72

−5.75

−6.00

−3.35

−3.20

−3.55

−4.31

−5.29

−4.05

−3.63

−3.76

−4.69

−5.63

−3.78

−3.51

−3.65

−4.18

−5.32

−4.15

−3.60

−3.65

−4.12

−4.56

−3.06

−2.96

−3.26

−3.94

−4.87

(20−35]

−3

−3.99

−4.66

−6.00

−6.00

−6.00

−2.90

−3.34

−4.25

−4.90

−5.84

−2.86

−4.01

−4.79

−5.91

−6.00

−2.66

−3.61

−4.36

−4.84

−6.00

−3.51

−4.12

−4.63

−5.21

−6.00

−2.52

−3.08

−3.96

−4.70

−5.31

(12−20]

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

−4

−6.00

−5.91

−5.03

−3.49

−3.02

−5.38

−4.91

−3.65

−2.76

−2.22

−4.77

−4.64

−3.72

−2.36

−1.96

−3.98

−4.28

−3.55

−2.32

−1.87

−5.54

−4.24

−3.41

−2.39

−1.86

−4.21

−3.92

−3.12

−1.94

−1.47

(65−99]

−6.00

−5.49

−4.29

−3.56

−3.53

−4.66

−3.94

−3.02

−2.68

−2.79

−4.65

−3.88

−3.18

−2.34

−2.34

−4.08

−3.51

−2.96

−2.29

−2.18

−4.58

−3.60

−3.00

−2.50

−2.43

−4.07

−3.41

−2.58

−1.95

−1.97

(50−65]

−5

−5.37

−4.50

−4.12

−4.28

−5.02

−3.96

−3.45

−2.96

−3.10

−3.76

−3.92

−3.31

−3.12

−3.20

−3.75

−3.54

−3.06

−2.90

−2.93

−3.31

−3.86

−3.19

−2.92

−2.99

−3.50

−3.62

−3.00

−2.56

−2.61

−3.19

(35−50]

−4.57

−4.37

−4.56

−5.46

−6.00

−3.20

−3.15

−3.41

−4.04

−4.96

−3.46

−3.18

−3.33

−3.88

−4.66

−3.02

−3.01

−3.13

−3.53

−3.94

−3.51

−3.19

−3.23

−3.64

−4.48

−3.05

−2.90

−2.98

−3.46

−4.14

(20−35]

−6

−4.10

−4.65

−5.30

−6.00

−6.00

−2.79

−3.19

−3.86

−4.62

−5.25

−2.82

−3.45

−3.88

−4.75

−5.31

−2.32

−2.98

−3.57

−4.14

−4.38

−3.14

−3.51

−3.89

−4.31

−4.87

−2.63

−3.07

−3.61

−4.06

−4.41

(12−20]

(12−20]

(20−35]

(35−50]

(50−65]

(65−99]

(12−20]

(20−35]

(35−50]

(50−65]

(65−99]

(12−20]

(20−35]

(35−50]

(50−65]

(65−99]

(12−20]

(20−35]

(35−50]

(50−65]

(65−99]

(12−20]

(20−35]

(35−50]

(50−65]

(65−99]

(12−20]

(20−35]

(35−50]

(50−65]

(65−99]

Demographics of impostor and enrollee

Figure 14: For six countries selected for the high number of images in the dataset and from distinct regions the heatmaps show cross-age false match rates for imposters of the same sex from the age groups given on the respective axes. Each cell depicts FMR on a logarithmic scale. The text value is log10(FMR) with large negative values encoding superior false match rates. Annex 9 contains the corresponding ﬁgure for all algorithms.

4.5 Do some or all algorithms yield more false positives on certain age groups

Method: Using high quality application portraits drawn from the corpus described in Annex 2 , we compared

442 019 images from 24 countries with 441 517 images of different individuals within and across age groups

(00 −20], (20 −35], (35 −50], (50 −65], and (65 −99].

We executed this set of comparisons with 126 veriﬁcation algorithms submitted to the FRVT Veriﬁcation track.

These are listed in Tables 4-6. Each comparison yield a score. When many scores are compared with a ﬁxed

threshold, we obtain an estimate of the false match rate. The threshold was computed over a set of 93 070 400

imposter comparisons made using a different set of images, namely the mugshots detailed in Annex 1 . The

threshold is the smallest value that for which the FMR is less than or equal to 0.00003. This was repeated for

other thresholds giving FMR {0.000001, 0.000003, 0.00001, 0.00003, 0.0001, 0.0003, 0.001, 0.003, 0.01, 0.03}.

Each comparison is accompanied by sex, country of birth and age group metadata for the two individuals

represented in the photographs. We excluded small numbers of photographs for which age information was

unavailable or for which sex was not listed as male or female.

Given many comparisons with the same demographic pairing, we can produce a measurement of FMR when

comparing individuals from two age groups, for example Polish men over the age of 65 with Polish men under

20.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 50

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

−6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 Cross age FMR at threshold T = 1.358 for algorithm imperial_002, giving FMR(T) = 0.0001 globally. log10 FMR

All impostor pairs Same sex and same region impostor pairs

−6.0

−6.0

−6.0

−6.0

−6.0

−5.9

−5.6

−5.4

−5.0

−4.6

−3.9

−3.4

−3.0

−2.8

−6.0

−6.0

−5.3

−5.2

−5.7

−5.0

−4.6

−4.6

−4.0

−3.7

−3.0

−2.6

−2.2

−2.0

(72,120]

−6.0

−5.9

−5.5

−5.9

−5.7

−5.5

−5.3

−4.9

−4.7

−4.1

−3.5

−3.2

−3.0

−3.0

−5.9

−5.1

−4.7

−5.3

−4.8

−4.6

−4.4

−4.1

−3.8

−3.3

−2.7

−2.3

−2.1

−2.2

(64,72]

−6.0

−5.7

−5.3

−5.4

−5.3

−5.1

−4.9

−4.6

−4.3

−3.8

−3.4

−3.2

−3.1

−3.2

−5.8

−5.1

−4.6

−4.6

−4.4

−4.2

−4.0

−3.7

−3.4

−3.0

−2.5

−2.3

−2.2

−2.4

(56,64]

−6.0

−5.7

−5.3

−5.1

−5.0

−4.8

−4.5

−4.2

−3.9

−3.7

−3.4

−3.4

−3.5

−3.7

−5.4

−5.0

−4.8

−4.3

−4.1

−3.8

−3.5

−3.3

−3.1

−2.8

−2.5

−2.5

−2.6

−2.9

(48,56]

−6.0

−5.6

−5.2

−4.9

−4.7

−4.5

−4.2

−4.0

−3.9

−3.7

−3.8

−4.0

−4.2

−4.6

−5.5

−5.0

−4.5

−4.0

−3.8

−3.5

−3.3

−3.1

−3.0

−2.9

−2.8

−3.1

−3.3

−3.7

(40,48]

−5.7

−5.2

−4.9

−4.6

−4.4

−4.2

−4.0

−3.9

−3.8

−3.8

−4.0

−4.3

−4.6

−4.9

−5.1

−4.5

−4.1

−3.7

−3.5

−3.3

−3.1

−2.9

−2.9

−2.9

−3.0

−3.4

−3.7

−4.0

(36,40]

Age of impostor

−5.9

−5.3

−4.8

−4.5

−4.3

−4.1

−4.0

−3.9

−3.9

−4.0

−4.2

−4.6

−4.9

−5.3

−5.3

−4.7

−4.1

−3.6

−3.4

−3.1

−3.0

−3.0

−2.9

−3.1

−3.3

−3.7

−4.0

−4.5

(32,36]

−5.7

−5.0

−4.6

−4.3

−4.1

−4.0

−4.0

−4.0

−4.1

−4.2

−4.5

−4.8

−5.2

−5.6

−5.1

−4.3

−3.8

−3.4

−3.2

−3.1

−3.0

−3.1

−3.1

−3.3

−3.5

−3.9

−4.3

−4.7

(28,32]

−5.5

−4.9

−4.5

−4.2

−4.0

−3.9

−4.0

−4.1

−4.2

−4.4

−4.7

−5.1

−5.4

−5.9

−4.9

−4.2

−3.7

−3.3

−3.1

−3.0

−3.1

−3.2

−3.3

−3.5

−3.8

−4.2

−4.5

−5.0

(24,28]

−5.3

−4.6

−4.2

−4.0

−4.0

−4.1

−4.1

−4.3

−4.4

−4.6

−5.0

−5.2

−5.4

−6.0

−4.8

−4.0

−3.5

−3.2

−3.2

−3.2

−3.3

−3.4

−3.5

−3.8

−4.1

−4.5

−4.6

−5.2

(20,24]

−5.0

−4.1

−3.7

−3.8

−4.0

−4.1

−4.2

−4.4

−4.5

−4.7

−5.1

−5.4

−5.8

−6.0

−4.3

−3.4

−3.0

−3.0

−3.1

−3.2

−3.3

−3.5

−3.7

−3.8

−4.2

−4.6

−5.0

−5.5

(16,20]

−3.8

−3.1

−3.0

−3.8

−4.2

−4.4

−4.6

−4.7

−4.9

−5.1

−5.5

−5.6

−5.7

−6.0

−3.4

−2.5

−2.4

−3.1

−3.4

−3.6

−3.8

−3.9

−4.2

−4.4

−4.8

−5.0

−5.1

−6.0

(10,16]

−2.8

−2.5

−2.9

−4.1

−4.5

−4.7

−5.0

−5.1

−5.1

−5.4

−5.6

−5.8

−5.8

−6.0

−2.3

−1.9

−2.3

−3.5

−3.9

−4.0

−4.3

−4.4

−4.5

−4.7

−5.0

−5.2

−5.4

−5.6

(04,10)

−2.0

−2.7

−3.6

−4.8

−5.1

−5.4

−5.5

−5.5

−5.4

−5.7

−6.0

−5.8

−6.0

−6.0

−1.6

−2.2

−3.1

−4.2

−4.5

−4.8

−4.9

−4.8

−5.3

−5.5

−5.5

−5.8

−5.5

−6.0

(0,4]

(0,4]

(04,10)

(10,16]

(16,20]

(20,24]

(24,28]

(28,32]

(32,36]

(36,40]

(40,48]

(48,56]

(56,64]

(64,72]

(72,120]

(0,4]

(04,10)

(10,16]

(16,20]

(20,24]

(24,28]

(28,32]

(32,36]

(36,40]

(40,48]

(48,56]

(56,64]

(64,72]

(72,120]

Age of enrollee

Figure 15: For visa photos from all countries, the heatmap shows for one algorithm cross-age false match rates for imposters of the same sex. Each cell depicts FMR on a logarithmic scale. The text value is log10(FMR) with large negative values encoding superior false match rates. The threshold is ﬁxed to the value that gives a FMR of 0.0001 over all zero-effort imposter pairs. Annex 10 contains the corresponding ﬁgure for all algorithms.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 51

Analysis: To address the issue of age we produced ﬁgures depicting cross-age false match rates. We do this

within-country only, as cross-country effects have been covered in section 4.3. We include male-male, female-

female, and also male-female comparisons (although they are of less interest operationally). Figure 14 is an

example, showing results for one of the more accurate algorithms. The Figure includes results for six countries,

one per region. We dropped one region (the Caribbean) and 18 of the 24 countries because the effects are similar

everywhere.

Figure 14 shows cross-age group FMR for one of the more accurate algorithms. Annex 9 contains correspond-

ing Figures for all algorithms, and therefore extends to more than 130 pages.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

Discussion: From Figure 14 and those in the annex, we make these observations.

▷Lower FMR for persons in different groups: In almost all cases - for all algorithms, countries of origin

and both sexes, comparison of images of persons in different age groups yields lower (better) false match

rates than for persons in the same age group. This, obviously, is an aggregate result; it will generally be

possible to ﬁnd some individuals from different age groups who produce high imposter scores but this

will be increasingly difﬁcult as the age difference increases.

▷Highest FMR in the oldest age group: For women from all most countries, comparison of images of

individuals in the 65-and-over age group produce the highest false match rates. For men this is often

true also.

▷High FMR in the youngest age group: For both sexes, but men in particular, comparison of images of

persons in the 12−20 age group produce high false match rates. The dataset does not include any subjects

below 12. Below that age we consider a smaller dataset of visa photographs (see Annex 3 ) that includes

individuals in age groups (0, 4] and (4, 10]. The results are included in the heatmap of Figure 15. Note

that each FMR estimate is formed from comparisons from all countries, not just one, so they hide the

geographic idiosyncrasies of the algorithms.

These results are similar to those reported by Michalski et al. [28] for false positives in children using

one commercial algorithm. The report also shows false negative ageing effects broken out by age at

enrolment, and time lapse.

▷Lower FMR across sex: Comparison of images of persons of different sex usually produces very low

FMR. However, within the youngest and oldest age groups, FMR is again higher and substantially above

the nominal FMR.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 52

Figure 16: For application photos, the The heatmap shows one-to-one false match rates for same-sex, same-age and same-country of birth imposters, broken out by age and country. The text value is log10(FMR) with large negative values encoding superior false match rates. Each cell depicts FMR on a logarithmic scale. The text value is log10(FMR) with large negative values encoding superior false match rates. Annex 11 contains the corresponding ﬁgure for all algorithms.

−2.05 −1.52 −1.93 −2.01 −1.96 −2.20 −2.38 −1.93 −2.42 −1.87 −1.63 −1.96 −2.22 −1.86 −2.46 −1.62 −1.97 −3.02 −3.11 −1.47 −1.38 −0.78 −1.70 −2.90

−2.58 −1.90 −2.47 −2.51 −2.34 −2.64 −2.86 −2.31 −2.97 −2.29 −2.07 −2.57 −2.68 −2.50 −2.77 −2.12 −2.49 −3.56 −3.62 −1.95 −1.76 −0.98 −2.19 −3.54

−2.94 −2.38 −2.70 −3.02 −3.12 −3.06 −3.31 −2.68 −3.37 −2.90 −2.55 −2.92 −2.96 −2.92 −3.20 −2.56 −3.08 −4.12 −4.14 −2.56 −2.27 −1.31 −2.71 −4.05

−3.29 −2.49 −2.99 −3.35 −3.18 −3.39 −3.50 −3.03 −3.57 −3.01 −2.92 −3.10 −3.15 −3.19 −3.50 −2.89 −3.41 −4.37 −4.44 −2.90 −2.77 −1.52 −3.08 −4.37

−3.05 −2.33 −2.99 −3.26 −2.82 −3.26 −3.42 −3.02 −3.34 −2.32 −2.38 −2.89 −2.79 −3.14 −3.36 −2.81 −3.10 −4.10 −4.42 −2.63 −2.75 −1.60 −2.54 −4.03

−2.88 −2.36 −2.97 −2.67 −3.04 −3.06 −3.25 −2.57 −2.97 −2.74 −2.33 −2.58 −2.84 −2.61 −3.14 −2.34 −2.98 −4.04 −4.32 −2.27 −1.98 −1.82 −2.42 −3.88

−3.17 −2.69 −3.09 −3.20 −3.51 −3.57 −3.65 −2.93 −3.50 −3.31 −2.82 −3.09 −3.07 −3.10 −3.46 −2.80 −3.65 −4.22 −4.32 −2.68 −2.44 −2.06 −2.91 −4.36

−3.40 −2.88 −3.21 −3.64 −3.58 −3.77 −3.86 −3.05 −3.93 −3.40 −2.97 −3.36 −3.15 −3.33 −3.64 −2.89 −3.79 −4.47 −4.67 −2.99 −2.83 −2.17 −3.14 −4.44

−3.46 −3.01 −3.42 −3.94 −3.63 −3.90 −3.82 −3.19 −4.02 −3.51 −2.81 −3.66 −3.20 −3.60 −3.63 −2.91 −3.86 −4.51 −4.50 −2.96 −2.90 −2.12 −3.05 −4.52

−3.14 −2.58 −3.32 −3.44 −2.86 −3.41 −3.36 −2.75 −3.53 −2.66 −2.37 −3.34 −2.90 −3.51 −3.37 −2.56 −3.24 −3.99 −3.83 −2.52 −2.58 −2.01 −2.49 −3.97

5_Somalia

−6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0

7_Vietnam

7_China

5_Ethiopia

7_Korea

7_Phillippines

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

7_Thailand

5_Kenya

7_Japan

3_Nigeria

Demographics of impostor and enrollee

3_Ghana

Algorithm: imperial_002 Threshold: 1.381120 Dataset: Application Nominal FMR: 0.000030 log10 FMR

3_Liberia

M

F

6_India

4_Haiti

6_Pakistan

2_El_Salvador

reports/11/figures/dhs_obim/cross_country/impostors/heatmap_fmr_age_x_country/imperial_002.pdf

2_Mexico

Impostors have same sex, age and country of birth

6_Iraq

4_Jamaica

2_Nicaragua

6_Iran

1_Ukraine

1_Russia

1_Poland

(65−99]

(50−65]

(35−50]

(20−35]

(12−20]

(65−99]

(50−65]

(35−50]

(20−35]

(12−20]

Age group

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 53

5 False negative differentials in veriﬁcation

5.1 Introduction

False negatives occur in biometric systems when samples from one individual yield a comparison score below

a threshold. This will occur when the features extracted from two input photographs are insufﬁciently similar.

Recall that face recognition is implemented as a differential operator: two samples are analyzed and compared.

So a false negative occurs when two from the same face appear different to the algorithm.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

5.2 Tests

This section gives empirical quantiﬁcation of the variation in false negative rates across demographics. We

base this on recognition results from three one-to-one veriﬁcation tests:

▷Mugshot - Mugshot: In the ﬁrst test we look for demographic effects in the groups deﬁned by the sex

and race labels provided with these United States images - see Annex 1 .

▷Application - Application photo: We consider also a high quality dataset collected from subjects hailing

from twenty four countries in seven global regions.

▷Application - Border crossing photo: As discussed in Annex 4 , the border crossing photos are collected

under time constraints, in high volume immigration environments. The photos there present classic pose

and illumination challenges to algorithms.

5.3 Metrics

The metrics appropriate to veriﬁcation have been detailed in section 3.1. These are related to particular ap-

plications in Figure 2. The dicussion in subsequent sections centers on false non-match rates at particular

thresholds, i.e. FNMR(T).

5.4 Results

Figure 17 summarizes the false non-match rates for the 52 most accurate algorithms comparing mugshot pho-

tos. It does this for each of four race categories and two sexes13. Figure 18 takes the same approach but for 20

countries of birth and two age groups (over/under 45). It summarizes comparison of high quality immigration

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 54

reports/11/figures/fbi/ngi/for_fmr/fnmr_by_sex_age_country_all_algorithms.pdf

Dataset: MUGSHOT FMR: 0.000010 Sex: Female Male

Indian

Asian

Race

White

Black

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 False non−match rate (FNMR): Distribution over 52 most accurate algorithms

Figure 17: For mugshot comparisons, the ﬁgure shows the distribution of FNMR values over the 52 most accurate veriﬁcation algorithms, by sex and race. The threshold was set for each algorithm to achieve FMR = 0.00001 over all imposter comparisons. The line within each box is the median over those algorithms; the box itself spans the interquartile range (26 algorithms) and the lines here extend to minimum and maximum values. The small box on the left side indicates the accuracy for best algorithm overall, on this dataset alphaface-001.

application photos with lower quality border crossing photos. These are described in Annex 2 and Annex 4

respectively.

We make the following observations.

▷FNMR is absolutely low: In one-to-one veriﬁcation of mugshots, the best algorithms give FNMR below

0.5% at the reasonably stringent FMR criterion of 0.00001. FNMR is generally below 1% with exceptions

discussed below. For the more difﬁcult application-border crossing comparisons, the best algorithm

almost always gives FNMR below 1%. These error rates are far better than the gender-classiﬁcation error

rates that spawned widespread coverage of bias in face recognition. In that study [5], two algorithms

assigned the wrong gender to black females almost 35% of the time. The recognition error rates here, even

from middling algorithms, are an order of magnitude lower. Thus, to the extent there are demographic

differentials, they are much smaller than those that (correctly) motivated criticisms of the 2017-era gender

classiﬁcation algorithms.

▷FNMR in African and African American subjects: In domestic mugshots, the lowest FNMR in images of

subjects whose race is listed as black. However, when comparing high-quality appliction photos with

border-crossing images, FNMR is often highest in African born subjects. We don’t formally measure

contrast or brightness in order to determine why this occurs, but inspection of the border quality images

shows underexposure of dark skinned individuals often due to bright background lighting in the border

crossing environment. In mugshots this does not occur. In neither case is the camera at fault.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 55

reports/11/figures/dhs_obim/entry_to_visa/fnmr_by_sex_age_country_all_algorithms.pdf

Dataset: Application vs. Border Crossing FMR: 0.000010 Sex: Female Male

5_Kenya

5_Somalia

3_Liberia

4_Haiti

3_Nigeria

6_India

4_Jamaica

1_Russia

3_Ghana

1_Poland

1_Ukraine

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

6_Pakistan

<=45 >45

7_Korea

2_Mexico

6_Iran

7_Vietnam

7_Japan

2_Nicaragua

7_Phillippines

7_Thailand

5_Ethiopia

7_China

Country of birth

2_El_Salvador

6_Iraq

5_Kenya

5_Somalia

3_Liberia

4_Haiti

3_Nigeria

6_India

4_Jamaica

1_Russia

3_Ghana

1_Poland

1_Ukraine

6_Pakistan

7_Korea

2_Mexico

6_Iran

7_Vietnam

7_Japan

2_Nicaragua

7_Phillippines

7_Thailand

5_Ethiopia

7_China

2_El_Salvador

6_Iraq

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04

False non−match rate (FNMR): Distribution over 52 most accurate algorithms

Figure 18: For the application - border crossing photo comparisons, the boxplots show the distribution of FNMR values over the 52 most accurate algorithms, by sex, country of birth, and age group. The threshold was set for each algorithm to achieve FMR = 0.00001 over all imposter comparisons. The line within each box is the median over those algorithms; the box itself spans the interquartile range (26 algorithms) and the lines here extend to minimum and maximum values. The small box on the left side indicates the accuracy for best algorithm overall, on this dataset visionlabs-007.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 56

0.050

sex

Female

0.030

Male

0.020

FMR_white_male

G FMR = 0.00001 at T = 1.3977

False non−match rate (FNMR)

G

FMR = 0.00010 at T = 1.3466

G

0.010

G

FMR = 0.00100 at T = 1.2860

0.008

0.005

G G

Dataset: MUGSHOT Algorithm: imperial_002

G

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

0.003

G

Am. Indian

0.002

G

Asian

Black

0.001

White

5e−06 1e−05 2e−053e−05 5e−05 1e−04 2e−043e−04 5e−04 1e−03 2e−033e−03 5e−03 1e−02 2e−023e−02 5e−02 1e−01 False match rate (FMR)

Figure 19: For one algorithm verifying mugshot images, the error tradeoff characteristics show false non-match vs. false match rates. The FMR estimates are computed for same-sex and same-race imposter comparisons. Each symbol (circle, triangle, square) corresponds to a ﬁxed threshold - their vertical and horizontal displacements reveal, respectively, differences in FNMR and FMR between demographic groups. The vertical line through each symbol indicates uncertainty related to sample size - it spans 95% of bootstrap samples of the genuine scores. Annex 12 contains the corresponding ﬁgure for all algorithms.

▷Women give higher FNMR: In most cases, algorithms give higher false non-match rates in women than

men. Note that this is a marginal effect - perhaps 98% of women are still correctly veriﬁed - so the

effect is conﬁned to fewer than 2% of comparisons where algorithms fail to verify. It is possible that the

error differences are due to relative prevalence some unknown covariate. There are some exceptions,

however: In Kenya, Nigeria, Jamaica men give higher FNMR. This applies in Haiti and Ghana also but

only for people aged 45 or over.

These aggregations of results over a large number of algorithms is intended to expose coarse differences be-

tween demographic groups. In so doing it hides that certain algorithms may differ from the trends evident in

the Figure. Full error tradeoff characteristics appear in Annex 12 .

The false negative results for law enforcement images apply to high quality mugshots, collected with deliberate

consideration of standards. When image quality degrades, false negatives are expected to increase. We next

consider results for the comparison of high quality Annex 2 application reference photos with Annex 4 border

crossing images collected in a less controlled environment under some (implicit) time constraint. We report

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 57

reports/11/figures/fbi/ngi/for_fmr/score_violins/imperial_002.pdf

Female Male

2.00

Algorithm: imperial_002 Threshold: 1.437290

1.75

FNMR

Genuine similarity score

0.016

1.50

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

0.0170 0.0143 0.0036 0.0077 0.0121 0.0051 0.0021 0.0062

0.012

1.25

0.008

1.00

0.004

0.75

Am. Indian Asian Black White Am. Indian Asian Black White

Race

Female Male

1.6

−2 FMR

−3.3 −4.4 −4.6 −5.0 −3.6 −4.8 −5.0 −5.0

1.4

Nonmate Similarity Score

−3

1.2

−4

1.0

−5

0.8

Am. Indian Asian Black White Am. Indian Asian Black White

Race

Figure 20: For one algorithm verifying mugshots, the violin plots show native similarity score distributions. The horizontal line shows the threshold that gives FMR = 0.0001 over all the imposter pairs. The imposters have the same sex and race. The upper ﬁgure shows genuine scores and the color indicates FNMR at the given threshold on a linear scale. The lower ﬁgure shows imposter scores with color indicating FMR on a logarithmic scale. FMR values below 10−5 are pinned to that value. Annex 15 contains the corresponding ﬁgure for all algorithms.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 58

results in two ways:

▷Per algorithm: Annex 14 shows FNMR by country of birth for two sexes and two age groups (above and

below age 45).

▷As Figure 22 heatmap showing results for all algorithms and all countries of birth. Each FNMR is the

arithmetic mean of the four FNMR estimates for male and female and age over and under 45. The rows

of the ﬁgure are sorted in order of mean FNMR, the mean being taken over all twenty four countries.

The columns of the ﬁgure are sorted in order of mean FNMR from the 50 most accurate algorithms - this

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

statistic was chosen so that high FNMR estimates from poor algorithms did not skew the results.

From these ﬁgure we note the following:

• Wide variation across algorithms: False non-match rates range from near 0.1% up to above 10%. This

two-orders-of-magnitude range shows that some algorithms are intolerant of the quality problems in-

herent in the image the border crossing images. These problems are: low contrast, non-centered and

cropped faces, non-frontal pose, and poor resolution, in part due to poor compression.

• The most accurate algorithms give low FNMR: The most accurate algorithms given FNMR below 1%

for almost all countries and demographic groups. For example, the Visionlabs-007 algorithm has outliers

only for Liberian and Somali women under the age of 45, for whom FNMR is below 1.4%.

• Lower variation across countries: For the more accurate algorithms, false non-match rates generally

range by a factor of two or three from the left side of Figure 22 to the right i.e. FNMR in El Salvador is

almost always lower than that in Somalia.

• No clear patterns by age and sex: By considering the Figures of Annex 14 , the differences between the

over- and under-45s is often small, varies by country and by algorithm. However, broad statements do

not mean that certain algorithms do not exhibit demographic differentials.

• Higher FNMR in subjects from Africa and the Caribbean: The heatmap is constructed with countries

appearing in order of the mean FNMR over the ﬁfty most accurate algorithms. This reveals higher FNMR

in Africa and the Caribbean. After those two regions, the next highest FNMR is in the Eastern Europe

countries.

The low error rates stem from efforts over the last decade to train algorithms that are invariant to nuisance

variables such as non-frontal pose and poor contrast. The absolute magnitude of FNMR drives inconvenience.

In many applications, any subject experiencing a false rejection could make a second attempt at recognition.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 59

reports/11/figures/dhs_obim/entry_to_visa/fnmr_by_sex_age_country/imperial_002.pdf

Female Male

0.03

Dataset: Application vs. Border Crossing

False non−match rate (FNMR)

Algorithm imperial_002 FMR 0.000010 Threshold 1.385590

0.02

<=45

0.01

>45

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

0.00

1_Poland

1_Russia

1_Ukraine 2_El_Salvador

2_Mexico

2_Nicaragua

3_Ghana

3_Liberia

3_Nigeria

4_Haiti

4_Jamaica

5_Ethiopia

5_Kenya

5_Somalia

6_India

6_Iran

6_Iraq 6_Pakistan

7_China

7_Japan

7_Korea 7_Phillippines

7_Thailand

7_Vietnam

1_Poland

1_Russia

1_Ukraine 2_El_Salvador

2_Mexico

2_Nicaragua

3_Ghana

3_Liberia

3_Nigeria

4_Haiti

4_Jamaica

5_Ethiopia

5_Kenya

5_Somalia

6_India

6_Iran

6_Iraq 6_Pakistan

7_China

7_Japan

7_Korea 7_Phillippines

7_Thailand

7_Vietnam

Country of birth

Figure 21: For 24 countries the ﬁgure shows false negative rates when the reference algorithm is used to compare two photos of subjects from the countries identiﬁed in the respective columns. The square box gives the median false non-match rate computed over 2000 bootstrap resamples of the genuine scores. The ends of the line span 95% of those re-samples, thereby giving a measure of uncertainty in the FNMR estimate. The threshold is set to a ﬁxed value everywhere; it is the lowest value that gives FMR ≤0.00001. Annex 14 contains the corresponding ﬁgure for all algorithms.

Why these effects occur would require some multivariate analysis of image- and subject-speciﬁc properties.

We suggest that analysis might start with measurement of image related quantities from the digital images to

include such as contrast, intensity, areas of over and under exposure, presence of cropping, and head orienta-

tion. For tools, mixed-effects regression models could be an initial starting point [4] but such work would need

to address correlation between quantities such race and contrast. We have not yet initiated such work and it

is possible that such analysis would be incomplete due to inﬂuential but unknown covariates. In particular,

given the border crossing images were collected with cameras mounted at ﬁxed height and are steered by the

immigration ofﬁcer toward the face it is possible that subject height inﬂuences genuine matching scores. For

example very tall subjects might be subject be underexposed because strong ceiling lights in the background

might cause underexposure. Inspection of failure cases invariably leads to insight in such cases. We have not

yet conducted that work.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 60

reports/11/figures/dhs_obim/entry_to_visa/fnmr_by_sex_age_country_all_algorithms_heatamp.pdf

psl_003

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 −0.0 −0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 −0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 −0.0 0.0 0.0 −0.0

chtface_001

−0.0 −0.0 0.0 0.0 −0.0 0.0 −0.0 0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 0.0 −0.0 −0.0 0.0 0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 0.0 0.0

shaman_000

−0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0

bm_001 intsysmsu_001

0.0 −0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 −0.0 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 0.0 0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 0.0 −0.0 0.0 0.0

−0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.2 −0.1 −0.1 −0.2 −0.1 −0.2

saffe_001 notiontag_000 videonetics_001

−0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.2 −0.1 −0.1 −0.2 −0.4 −0.3 −0.4 −0.2 −0.3 −0.3

−0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.2 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.2 −0.2 −0.2 −0.2 −0.2 −0.2 −0.2 −0.4 −0.3 −0.3 −0.3 −0.3 −0.4

−0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.2 −0.2 −0.2 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.3 −0.2 −0.2 −0.2 −0.4 −0.3 −0.3 −0.3 −0.3 −0.4

isap_001 ayonix_000 amplifiedgroup_001

−0.2 −0.2 −0.2 −0.2 −0.2 −0.1 −0.2 −0.2 −0.2 −0.2 −0.2 −0.1 −0.2 −0.1 −0.2 −0.2 −0.2 −0.2 −0.5 −0.4 −0.5 −0.3 −0.3 −0.4

−0.3 −0.3 −0.3 −0.4 −0.3 −0.3 −0.2 −0.2 −0.2 −0.2 −0.2 −0.3 −0.2 −0.2 −0.5 −0.4 −0.4 −0.5 −0.4 −0.4 −0.4 −0.5 −0.4 −0.5

−0.2 −0.2 −0.2 −0.4 −0.3 −0.3 −0.4 −0.3 −0.4 −0.3 −0.3 −0.3 −0.4 −0.3 −0.4 −0.3 −0.3 −0.4 −0.5 −0.4 −0.4 −0.5 −0.5 −0.5

kakao_001 shaman_001

−0.6 −0.7 −0.6 −0.8 −0.7 −0.7 −0.4 −0.4 −0.4 −0.4 −0.4 −0.6 −0.5 −0.6 −0.8 −0.8 −0.8 −0.8 −1.0 −0.8 −0.9 −0.9 −0.9 −1.0

−0.5 −0.5 −0.5 −0.6 −0.5 −0.5 −0.8 −0.7 −0.7 −0.6 −0.6 −0.6 −0.7 −0.6 −0.7 −0.6 −0.6 −0.6 −1.0 −0.8 −0.9 −0.8 −0.7 −0.9

smilart_002

−0.6 −0.6 −0.6 −0.8 −0.7 −0.7 −0.6 −0.6 −0.6 −0.5 −0.5 −0.7 −0.6 −0.6 −0.8 −0.8 −0.8 −0.8 −0.8 −0.7 −0.7 −0.9 −0.8 −0.9

dsk_000 tuputech_000

−0.8 −0.7 −0.8 −0.8 −0.8 −0.7 −0.5 −0.5 −0.5 −0.5 −0.5 −0.8 −0.6 −0.7 −0.8 −0.9 −0.9 −0.8 −0.8 −0.7 −0.7 −0.8 −0.7 −0.8

−0.7 −0.7 −0.7 −0.9 −0.8 −0.8 −0.7 −0.8 −0.7 −0.7 −0.7 −0.9 −0.7 −0.8 −0.9 −0.9 −1.0 −1.0 −0.7 −0.6 −0.6 −0.8 −0.7 −0.8

iit_001 iit_000 awiros_001 nodeflux_001

−0.8 −0.9 −0.9 −1.0 −1.0 −0.9 −0.6 −0.6 −0.6 −0.6 −0.6 −0.8 −0.7 −0.7 −0.9 −1.0 −1.0 −0.9 −1.0 −1.0 −1.0 −1.1 −1.0 −1.0

−0.8 −0.9 −0.8 −1.1 −1.1 −1.0 −0.7 −0.7 −0.7 −0.7 −0.7 −1.0 −0.8 −0.9 −1.0 −1.0 −1.2 −1.0 −1.0 −0.9 −0.9 −1.1 −1.0 −1.0

−0.8 −0.9 −0.8 −1.1 −1.0 −1.0 −0.8 −0.8 −0.8 −0.7 −0.7 −1.0 −0.8 −0.8 −1.1 −1.1 −1.0 −1.1 −1.1 −1.1 −1.1 −1.1 −1.1 −1.1

−0.9 −0.9 −0.9 −1.0 −0.9 −1.1 −1.0 −0.9 −0.9 −1.0 −1.0 −0.9 −0.9 −0.9 −0.9 −0.9 −0.9 −0.9 −0.9 −0.9 −0.9 −0.8 −0.8 −0.9

veridas_001

−0.8 −0.9 −0.8 −1.0 −0.9 −0.9 −0.9 −0.9 −0.9 −0.9 −0.9 −1.2 −1.0 −1.1 −1.2 −0.9 −0.8 −1.0 −1.2 −1.1 −1.1 −1.3 −1.2 −1.3

veridas_002 synesis_004

−1.2 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3 −1.2 −1.1 −0.7 −0.6 −0.6 −0.6 −0.7 −0.8 −0.8 −0.8 −1.1 −1.3 −1.2 −1.1 −1.4 −1.4 −1.4 −1.5 −1.4 −1.4

−0.9 −1.0 −0.9 −1.2 −1.1 −1.1 −0.8 −0.8 −0.8 −0.8 −0.8 −1.2 −0.9 −1.1 −1.3 −1.2 −1.2 −1.3 −1.1 −1.0 −1.0 −1.2 −1.1 −1.2

vion_000 adera_001 yisheng_004

−0.8 −0.9 −0.9 −1.1 −1.0 −1.0 −1.0 −0.9 −0.9 −0.8 −0.9 −1.1 −1.0 −1.0 −1.1 −1.1 −1.1 −1.1 −1.4 −1.1 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3 −1.4

−1.0 −1.1 −1.0 −1.2 −1.1 −1.1 −1.0 −1.0 −1.0 −0.9 −1.0 −1.2 −1.0 −1.1 −1.3 −1.3 −1.4 −1.3 −0.9 −0.8 −0.8 −1.0 −0.9 −1.0

−1.2 −1.4 −1.4 −1.5 −1.4 −1.2 −0.7 −0.7 −0.7 −0.6 −0.7 −1.0 −0.8 −0.9 −1.2 −1.4 −1.3 −1.3 −1.6 −1.5 −1.5 −1.6 −1.6 −1.6

aware_003

−1.0 −1.1 −1.0 −1.2 −1.1 −1.1 −1.1 −1.0 −1.0 −0.9 −1.0 −1.1 −1.1 −1.0 −1.2 −1.2 −1.2 −1.2 −1.3 −1.1 −1.1 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3

kneron_003

−1.1 −1.3 −1.2 −1.1 −1.1 −1.2 −1.0 −0.9 −1.0 −0.9 −1.0 −1.2 −1.0 −1.2 −1.1 −1.2 −1.2 −1.1 −1.3 −1.2 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3

ceiec_001 aware_004 imagus_000 lookman_002 nodeflux_002

−1.4 −1.5 −1.5 −1.4 −1.4 −1.3 −1.1 −1.0 −1.0 −0.9 −1.1 −1.2 −1.1 −0.9 −1.2 −1.4 −1.2 −1.2 −1.6 −1.5 −1.6 −1.5 −1.6 −1.4

−1.3 −1.4 −1.4 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3 −1.1 −1.1 −1.1 −1.0 −1.1 −1.2 −1.2 −1.0 −1.2 −1.4 −1.3 −1.2 −1.6 −1.5 −1.5 −1.5 −1.5 −1.4

−1.3 −1.4 −1.4 −1.6 −1.5 −1.5 −0.9 −0.9 −0.9 −1.0 −1.0 −1.4 −1.1 −1.3 −1.4 −1.5 −1.6 −1.4 −1.5 −1.4 −1.4 −1.6 −1.5 −1.6

−1.1 −1.2 −1.1 −1.5 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3 −1.1 −1.2 −1.1 −1.2 −1.3 −1.2 −1.3 −1.4 −1.4 −1.4 −1.4 −1.4 −1.2 −1.3 −1.5 −1.4 −1.5

Dataset: Application vs. Border Crossing

−1.4 −1.4 −1.4 −1.4 −1.2 −1.4 −1.3 −1.2 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3 −1.2 −1.2 −1.3 −1.3 −1.2 −1.4 −1.4 −1.4 −1.3 −1.4 −1.3

lookman_004

−1.4 −1.5 −1.5 −1.4 −1.4 −1.3 −1.2 −1.1 −1.1 −1.1 −1.2 −1.2 −1.2 −1.0 −1.2 −1.4 −1.3 −1.2 −1.7 −1.6 −1.6 −1.5 −1.6 −1.4

vocord_007 smilart_003 kedacom_000

−1.4 −1.5 −1.5 −1.4 −1.4 −1.3 −1.2 −1.1 −1.1 −1.1 −1.2 −1.2 −1.2 −1.0 −1.2 −1.4 −1.3 −1.2 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.5 −1.6 −1.4

−1.2 −1.3 −1.3 −1.6 −1.4 −1.5 −1.1 −1.1 −1.1 −1.0 −1.1 −1.4 −1.1 −1.3 −1.4 −1.5 −1.6 −1.5 −1.5 −1.3 −1.3 −1.6 −1.5 −1.6

−1.5 −1.6 −1.5 −1.2 −1.2 −1.2 −1.6 −1.4 −1.3 −1.3 −1.5 −1.3 −1.4 −0.9 −1.2 −1.2 −1.1 −1.2 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.3 −1.4 −1.3

vocord_006 intellivision_002

−1.3 −1.4 −1.3 −1.5 −1.4 −1.4 −1.2 −1.2 −1.2 −1.1 −1.1 −1.4 −1.2 −1.3 −1.4 −1.5 −1.5 −1.4 −1.6 −1.4 −1.5 −1.6 −1.6 −1.6

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

−1.6 −1.6 −1.6 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3 −1.6 −1.4 −1.3 −1.4 −1.5 −1.3 −1.5 −0.9 −1.2 −1.3 −1.2 −1.2 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.4 −1.5 −1.3

x−laboratory_000

−1.3 −1.8 −1.5 −1.3 −1.4 −1.2 −1.3 −1.2 −1.2 −1.2 −1.3 −1.4 −1.4 −1.1 −1.3 −1.5 −1.5 −1.3 −1.8 −1.5 −1.6 −1.6 −1.5 −1.6

tiger_002 digitalbarriers_002

−1.3 −1.4 −1.4 −1.6 −1.4 −1.5 −1.2 −1.2 −1.2 −1.2 −1.2 −1.5 −1.3 −1.3 −1.5 −1.5 −1.5 −1.5 −1.6 −1.4 −1.5 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7

−1.2 −1.3 −1.3 −1.6 −1.3 −1.5 −1.3 −1.3 −1.4 −1.2 −1.2 −1.6 −1.3 −1.5 −1.5 −1.4 −1.5 −1.5 −1.6 −1.4 −1.4 −1.6 −1.6 −1.6

psl_002 3divi_003

−1.4 −1.5 −1.4 −1.7 −1.5 −1.6 −1.3 −1.2 −1.3 −1.2 −1.3 −1.5 −1.3 −1.3 −1.5 −1.6 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7 −1.6 −1.6 −1.7 −1.7 −1.8

FMR = 1e−05

−1.4 −1.4 −1.4 −1.8 −1.5 −1.6 −1.4 −1.4 −1.4 −1.3 −1.3 −1.6 −1.4 −1.4 −1.6 −1.5 −1.6 −1.6 −1.6 −1.4 −1.5 −1.7 −1.6 −1.6

vd_001 kakao_002

−1.5 −1.6 −1.5 −1.8 −1.6 −1.7 −1.4 −1.3 −1.4 −1.3 −1.3 −1.6 −1.4 −1.3 −1.6 −1.6 −1.7 −1.6 −1.6 −1.4 −1.5 −1.7 −1.6 −1.6

−1.6 −1.6 −1.6 −1.8 −1.7 −1.7 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3 −1.1 −1.2 −1.5 −1.4 −1.3 −1.5 −1.7 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7 −1.8 −1.8 −1.7

ceiec_002

−1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.8 −1.5 −1.8 −1.4 −1.4 −1.5 −1.4 −1.5 −1.6 −1.4 −1.4 −1.6 −1.5 −1.6 −1.6 −1.6 −1.6 −1.5 −1.6 −1.6 −1.5

log10 FNMR

f8_001 imagus_001 vigilantsolutions_006

−1.5 −1.6 −1.5 −1.8 −1.6 −1.7 −1.4 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3 −1.6 −1.4 −1.4 −1.7 −1.7 −1.8 −1.7 −1.9 −1.7 −1.7 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9

−1.6 −1.6 −1.6 −1.8 −1.7 −1.7 −1.5 −1.4 −1.4 −1.4 −1.5 −1.7 −1.5 −1.4 −1.6 −1.7 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7 −1.5 −1.5 −1.8 −1.6 −1.7

−1.6 −1.7 −1.7 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −1.4 −1.4 −1.4 −1.4 −1.4 −1.5 −1.4 −1.5 −1.6 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.8

rankone_006 cognitec_000 cognitec_001 innovatrics_004

−1.5 −1.5 −1.5 −1.9 −1.6 −1.8 −1.5 −1.3 −1.4 −1.4 −1.4 −1.7 −1.5 −1.5 −1.7 −1.7 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −1.6 −1.6 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9

−1.7 −1.8 −1.7 −1.9 −1.8 −1.8 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3 −1.7 −1.4 −1.4 −1.6 −1.8 −1.8 −1.6 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −1.8 −1.8

0

−1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −1.4 −1.3 −1.4 −1.4 −1.4 −1.6 −1.5 −1.4 −1.6 −1.8 −1.7 −1.6 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.7

−1.6 −1.6 −1.6 −1.8 −1.7 −1.7 −1.5 −1.5 −1.5 −1.4 −1.5 −1.6 −1.5 −1.3 −1.5 −1.7 −1.7 −1.6 −1.8 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −1.8 −1.7

id3_003 siat_002 sensetime_002

−1.7 −1.8 −1.8 −1.6 −1.5 −1.8 −1.6 −1.6 −1.7 −1.4 −1.6 −1.7 −1.6 −1.5 −1.5 −1.6 −1.5 −1.5 −1.6 −1.7 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7 −1.5

−1.7 −1.8 −1.7 −1.6 −1.5 −1.7 −1.8 −1.6 −1.8 −1.5 −1.7 −1.7 −1.6 −1.5 −1.5 −1.6 −1.5 −1.4 −1.7 −1.8 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7 −1.6

−1.6 −1.6 −1.6 −1.9 −1.7 −1.7 −1.5 −1.4 −1.5 −1.4 −1.5 −1.7 −1.5 −1.5 −1.7 −1.7 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −1.6 −1.7 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9

rankone_007

−1.6 −1.7 −1.7 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −1.6 −1.5 −1.6 −1.5 −1.6 −1.7 −1.6 −1.4 −1.6 −1.7 −1.7 −1.6 −1.9 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9 −1.9 −1.8

siat_004 vigilantsolutions_007

−1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.9 −1.8 −1.8 −1.5 −1.4 −1.5 −1.4 −1.4 −1.7 −1.5 −1.6 −1.8 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.8 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0

−1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −1.7 −1.5 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.7 −1.7 −1.5 −1.6 −1.6 −1.5 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7 −1.5

tiger_003

−1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.9 −1.7 −1.8 −1.7 −1.6 −1.6 −1.6 −1.6 −1.8 −1.6 −1.6 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.6 −1.8 −1.7 −1.7 −1.8 −1.9 −1.7

sensetime_001

−1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −1.7 −1.5 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −1.8 −1.8 −1.7 −1.5 −1.6 −1.6 −1.5 −1.7 −1.8 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7 −1.6

tech5_002 realnetworks_003 realnetworks_002

−1.7 −1.8 −1.8 −2.0 −1.8 −1.9 −1.5 −1.5 −1.5 −1.5 −1.5 −1.9 −1.6 −1.6 −1.8 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −1.7 −1.7 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9

−1.7 −1.8 −1.7 −2.0 −1.8 −1.9 −1.5 −1.5 −1.5 −1.5 −1.5 −1.9 −1.6 −1.6 −1.8 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −1.7 −1.7 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9

−1.7 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −1.6 −1.9 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −1.7 −1.7 −1.5 −1.7 −1.6 −1.6 −1.7 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8

visionbox_000

−1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −2.0 −1.8 −1.9 −1.6 −1.5 −1.6 −1.5 −1.5 −1.8 −1.6 −1.5 −1.8 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9 −1.7 −1.7 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9

saffe_002 intelresearch_000

−1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.9 −1.7 −1.9 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.7 −1.7 −1.8 −1.8 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.6 −1.8 −1.7 −1.7

−1.8 −1.8 −1.9 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9 −1.6 −1.6 −1.6 −1.5 −1.6 −1.8 −1.6 −1.6 −1.8 −1.9 −2.0 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.8 −2.0 −1.9 −2.0

id3_004 meiya_001

−1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.8 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7 −1.8 −1.7 −1.6 −1.8 −2.0 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9 −1.7 −1.7 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9

−1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −2.1 −1.9 −2.0 −1.6 −1.5 −1.6 −1.5 −1.6 −1.9 −1.6 −1.6 −1.8 −1.9 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9 −1.8 −1.8 −2.0 −1.9 −2.0

Algorithm

via_000 rokid_000 incode_003 alchera_001

−1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −2.1 −1.9 −2.0 −1.6 −1.6 −1.6 −1.5 −1.5 −1.8 −1.6 −1.6 −1.8 −1.9 −2.0 −1.8 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9 −2.1 −2.0 −2.0

−1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −2.0 −1.8 −1.9 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7 −1.9 −1.7 −1.6 −1.8 −1.9 −2.0 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.8 −2.0 −1.9 −2.0

−1

−2.0 −2.0 −2.1 −2.1 −2.0 −2.0 −1.7 −1.6 −1.6 −1.5 −1.6 −1.7 −1.7 −1.4 −1.6 −1.9 −1.8 −1.7 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.0

−1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −2.1 −1.9 −1.9 −1.7 −1.6 −1.6 −1.6 −1.6 −1.9 −1.7 −1.6 −1.8 −1.9 −2.0 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.8 −2.0 −1.9 −2.0

upc_001 3divi_004

−1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −2.1 −1.9 −2.1 −1.6 −1.5 −1.5 −1.5 −1.6 −1.9 −1.6 −1.5 −1.8 −2.0 −2.1 −1.9 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.1 −2.1 −2.0

−1.9 −1.8 −1.9 −2.1 −1.9 −2.0 −1.8 −1.6 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −2.0 −1.8 −1.8 −1.9 −2.0 −2.0 −1.9 −1.7 −1.6 −1.6 −1.9 −1.8 −1.8

pixelall_002 trueface_000 samtech_001

−1.9 −1.8 −1.9 −2.1 −1.9 −2.0 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7 −1.9 −1.7 −1.6 −1.8 −1.9 −1.9 −1.8 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9 −2.1 −2.0 −2.0

−1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −2.0 −1.9 −2.0 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.9 −1.7 −1.6 −1.8 −1.9 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9 −1.8 −1.7 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9

−1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −2.1 −1.9 −2.0 −1.7 −1.6 −1.6 −1.6 −1.6 −1.9 −1.7 −1.7 −1.8 −1.9 −1.9 −1.8 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9 −2.1 −2.0 −2.0

itmo_006 alchera_000

−1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −2.2 −1.9 −2.1 −1.6 −1.6 −1.6 −1.5 −1.6 −1.9 −1.6 −1.7 −1.8 −2.0 −2.0 −1.9 −2.0 −1.9 −2.0 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1

−1.9 −1.8 −1.9 −2.0 −1.8 −2.0 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.8 −1.9 −2.0 −1.8

ctbcbank_000

−1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −2.2 −2.0 −2.0 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7 −2.0 −1.7 −1.6 −1.8 −2.0 −2.0 −1.9 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9 −2.1 −2.0 −2.1

everai_002 iqface_000 gorilla_003 neurotechnology_005

−1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −2.2 −2.0 −2.0 −1.7 −1.6 −1.6 −1.6 −1.6 −1.9 −1.7 −1.6 −1.9 −2.0 −2.1 −2.0 −2.0 −1.9 −2.0 −2.1 −2.0 −2.1

−1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −2.1 −1.9 −2.0 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −2.0 −1.7 −1.6 −1.9 −1.9 −2.0 −1.9 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9 −2.1 −2.0 −2.1

−1.9 −1.9 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −1.7 −1.7 −1.8 −1.7 −1.7 −2.0 −1.7 −1.6 −1.8 −1.9 −2.0 −1.9 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −1.9 −2.0

−1.8 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −2.0 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −1.8 −1.9 −1.9 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −2.0 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9

cogent_003 synesis_005

−1.9 −1.8 −1.8 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −2.0 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −2.0 −1.9 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0

−1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −2.1 −2.0 −1.9 −1.8 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.9 −1.7 −1.7 −1.8 −2.0 −2.1 −1.8 −2.1 −2.0 −2.0 −2.1 −2.0 −2.0

idemia_004 winsense_000

−1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −2.1 −1.9 −2.0 −1.7 −1.8 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −2.0 −2.0 −1.8 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9 −2.0 −2.1 −2.0

−1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −2.2 −1.9 −2.0 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −2.0 −1.7 −1.6 −1.9 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1

pyramid_000 synology_000

−1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −2.2 −2.0 −2.1 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7 −2.0 −1.7 −1.7 −1.9 −2.0 −2.1 −2.0 −2.1 −1.9 −2.0 −2.2 −2.1 −2.1

−1.9 −1.9 −2.0 −2.2 −2.0 −2.1 −1.8 −1.7 −1.7 −1.8 −1.8 −2.0 −1.8 −1.6 −1.8 −2.0 −1.9 −1.8 −2.1 −2.0 −2.0 −2.1 −2.0 −2.0

−2

deepsea_001 ctbcbank_001

−1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −2.1 −2.0 −2.1 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −2.0 −1.8 −1.7 −1.9 −2.0 −2.1 −1.9 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9 −2.1 −2.1 −2.0

−2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.2 −2.0 −2.2 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7 −2.0 −1.7 −1.7 −1.9 −2.1 −2.1 −2.0 −2.1 −2.0 −2.0 −2.1 −2.1 −2.2

visionbox_001

−1.9 −1.9 −2.0 −2.2 −2.0 −2.1 −1.7 −1.6 −1.8 −1.7 −1.7 −2.0 −1.8 −1.7 −2.0 −2.0 −2.1 −2.0 −2.1 −2.0 −2.0 −2.2 −2.1 −2.1

gorilla_004 starhybrid_001

−2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.3 −2.1 −2.2 −1.7 −1.6 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −2.0 −1.7 −1.7 −1.9 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.0 −2.1 −2.2 −2.1 −2.1

−1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −2.2 −1.9 −2.0 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −2.1 −1.9 −1.9 −2.0 −2.0 −2.1 −2.0 −2.1 −1.9 −2.0 −2.2 −2.1 −2.2

dahua_002 cogent_004

−2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.1 −2.0 −2.0 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −2.0 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −2.1 −2.1 −1.9 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1

−2.0 −2.0 −2.1 −2.3 −2.1 −2.2 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −1.7 −2.0 −1.7 −1.8 −2.0 −2.2 −2.2 −2.0 −2.1 −2.0 −2.1 −2.2 −2.2 −2.2

idemia_005 neurotechnology_006

−2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.3 −2.1 −2.1 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −1.7 −1.7 −2.0 −1.8 −1.7 −2.0 −2.1 −2.2 −2.1 −2.1 −2.0 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.2

−2.0 −2.0 −1.9 −2.3 −2.0 −2.1 −1.9 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −1.9 −2.1 −1.8 −1.7 −2.0 −2.1 −2.2 −2.1 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9 −2.2 −2.1 −2.1

incode_004 intsysmsu_000

−2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.3 −2.1 −2.2 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −2.0 −1.8 −1.8 −2.0 −2.1 −2.2 −2.1 −2.2 −2.0 −2.1 −2.2 −2.2 −2.2

−2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.2 −2.1 −2.1 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.8 −1.9 −2.1 −1.9 −1.8 −2.0 −2.1 −2.2 −2.0 −2.1 −2.0 −2.0 −2.2 −2.0 −2.1

ulsee_001 remarkai_000 remarkai_001

−2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.3 −2.1 −2.1 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.8 −2.0 −1.9 −1.8 −2.0 −2.1 −2.2 −2.0 −2.1 −2.0 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.2

−2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.3 −2.1 −2.1 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.8 −2.0 −1.9 −1.8 −2.0 −2.1 −2.2 −2.1 −2.1 −2.0 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.2

−2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.3 −2.0 −2.1 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9 −2.0 −1.9 −1.7 −2.0 −2.1 −2.1 −2.0 −2.1 −2.0 −2.1 −2.2 −2.2 −2.2

tongyi_005 pixelall_003

−2.1 −2.0 −2.2 −2.3 −2.1 −2.2 −1.9 −1.7 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9 −2.1 −1.9 −1.7 −1.9 −2.1 −2.1 −1.9 −2.2 −2.2 −2.2 −2.2 −2.2 −2.2

−2.0 −2.0 −2.1 −2.2 −2.1 −2.2 −1.9 −1.7 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9 −2.1 −1.9 −1.9 −2.0 −2.2 −2.2 −2.1 −2.1 −2.0 −2.0 −2.2 −2.0 −2.2

shu_001 cyberlink_002

−2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.3 −2.1 −2.2 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.8 −2.1 −1.9 −1.8 −2.0 −2.1 −2.2 −2.1 −2.2 −2.0 −2.1 −2.2 −2.2 −2.2

−2.1 −2.1 −2.2 −2.4 −2.2 −2.4 −1.7 −1.7 −1.8 −1.7 −1.7 −2.1 −1.8 −1.8 −2.1 −2.2 −2.3 −2.2 −2.3 −2.1 −2.1 −2.3 −2.2 −2.3

dahua_003 asusaics_000

−2.1 −2.0 −2.1 −2.3 −2.1 −2.2 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −1.8 −1.9 −2.1 −1.8 −1.8 −2.0 −2.2 −2.2 −2.1 −2.2 −2.1 −2.1 −2.2 −2.2 −2.2

−2.1 −2.0 −2.1 −2.1 −2.0 −2.1 −2.1 −1.9 −1.9 −1.8 −2.0 −2.1 −2.0 −1.9 −2.0 −2.1 −2.0 −2.0 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0

−3

incode_005 intellicloudai_001

−2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.3 −2.1 −2.1 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9 −2.1 −1.9 −1.8 −2.0 −2.1 −2.2 −2.1 −2.2 −2.0 −2.1 −2.2 −2.2 −2.2

−2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.2 −2.1 −2.2 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −1.9 −2.0 −2.2 −2.0 −1.8 −2.0 −2.1 −2.1 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.2 −2.1 −2.1

cyberlink_003 aiunionface_000

−2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.3 −2.1 −2.2 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9 −2.1 −1.9 −1.9 −2.0 −2.1 −2.2 −2.1 −2.2 −2.1 −2.1 −2.2 −2.1 −2.2

−2.1 −2.0 −2.0 −2.3 −2.1 −2.2 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −2.0 −2.2 −1.9 −1.8 −2.1 −2.2 −2.3 −2.1 −2.2 −2.1 −2.1 −2.3 −2.2 −2.3

einetworks_000

−2.1 −2.0 −2.1 −2.4 −2.2 −2.3 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −2.0 −2.2 −1.9 −1.9 −2.0 −2.2 −2.2 −2.1 −2.2 −2.1 −2.1 −2.2 −2.2 −2.2

hik_001 tevian_005 camvi_002 intellifusion_001

−2.1 −2.1 −2.2 −2.4 −2.2 −2.3 −1.9 −1.7 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −2.3 −1.9 −1.9 −2.1 −2.3 −2.2 −2.1 −2.2 −2.2 −2.2 −2.3 −2.2 −2.2

−2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.4 −2.2 −2.3 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −2.0 −2.2 −1.9 −1.9 −2.1 −2.2 −2.3 −2.2 −2.2 −2.1 −2.1 −2.3 −2.3 −2.3

−2.2 −2.2 −2.3 −2.4 −2.3 −2.4 −1.9 −1.7 −1.9 −1.8 −2.0 −2.2 −2.0 −1.7 −2.1 −2.3 −2.3 −2.2 −2.4 −2.3 −2.4 −2.3 −2.3 −2.3

−2.2 −2.2 −2.2 −2.4 −2.2 −2.3 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9 −1.8 −1.9 −2.2 −2.0 −1.8 −2.1 −2.3 −2.2 −2.1 −2.3 −2.2 −2.2 −2.3 −2.3 −2.3

uluface_002

−2.2 −2.1 −2.2 −2.5 −2.2 −2.3 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −2.0 −2.2 −1.9 −1.9 −2.1 −2.3 −2.4 −2.2 −2.2 −2.1 −2.1 −2.3 −2.2 −2.3

hr_001 anke_003 tevian_004 everai_paravision_003

−2.1 −2.2 −2.1 −2.2 −2.2 −2.3 −2.0 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.2 −2.1 −2.0 −1.9 −2.0 −2.2 −2.2 −2.1 −2.1 −2.2 −2.2 −2.1 −2.1 −2.2

−2.1 −2.1 −2.2 −2.4 −2.2 −2.3 −2.1 −1.9 −2.0 −1.9 −2.0 −2.2 −2.0 −1.7 −2.1 −2.2 −2.2 −2.1 −2.3 −2.2 −2.3 −2.3 −2.3 −2.3

−2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.4 −2.2 −2.3 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.2 −2.0 −1.9 −2.1 −2.2 −2.3 −2.2 −2.3 −2.1 −2.2 −2.3 −2.2 −2.3

−2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.4 −2.2 −2.3 −2.1 −1.9 −2.0 −2.0 −2.1 −2.2 −2.0 −1.9 −2.1 −2.2 −2.3 −2.2 −2.3 −2.2 −2.2 −2.3 −2.2 −2.3

mt_000 sjtu_001

−2.3 −2.2 −2.2 −2.4 −2.3 −2.4 −2.0 −1.9 −1.9 −1.9 −2.0 −2.3 −1.9 −2.0 −2.2 −2.3 −2.4 −2.2 −2.3 −2.2 −2.2 −2.3 −2.2 −2.3

−2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.4 −2.2 −2.3 −2.1 −2.1 −2.0 −2.0 −2.1 −2.2 −2.1 −1.9 −2.1 −2.2 −2.3 −2.2 −2.2 −2.1 −2.2 −2.3 −2.3 −2.3

tech5_003

−2.2 −2.2 −2.2 −2.3 −2.2 −2.2 −2.1 −2.1 −2.0 −2.0 −2.1 −2.2 −2.0 −1.9 −2.1 −2.3 −2.2 −2.1 −2.4 −2.3 −2.3 −2.2 −2.2 −2.3

sertis_000 camvi_004

−2.2 −2.2 −2.2 −2.5 −2.2 −2.4 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.1 −2.3 −2.0 −1.9 −2.2 −2.3 −2.4 −2.3 −2.4 −2.3 −2.3 −2.4 −2.3 −2.4

−2.2 −2.1 −2.2 −2.4 −2.3 −2.4 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.2 −2.4 −2.1 −1.9 −2.2 −2.3 −2.5 −2.3 −2.3 −2.2 −2.2 −2.3 −2.3 −2.3

anke_004 ntechlab_006

−2.2 −2.2 −2.2 −2.5 −2.3 −2.4 −2.1 −2.0 −2.0 −2.1 −2.1 −2.4 −2.0 −2.0 −2.2 −2.3 −2.3 −2.3 −2.4 −2.3 −2.3 −2.3 −2.3 −2.3

−2.2 −2.1 −2.2 −2.5 −2.3 −2.4 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.3 −2.0 −1.9 −2.1 −2.3 −2.4 −2.3 −2.3 −2.2 −2.2 −2.3 −2.3 −2.4

winsense_001

−2.3 −2.2 −2.4 −2.6 −2.3 −2.5 −2.2 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −2.1 −2.3 −2.1 −1.8 −2.2 −2.4 −2.4 −2.2 −2.3 −2.2 −2.2 −2.4 −2.3 −2.3

yitu_003 innovatrics_006

−2.2 −2.2 −2.3 −2.6 −2.3 −2.4 −2.1 −2.0 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.3 −2.1 −1.8 −2.2 −2.3 −2.5 −2.3 −2.4 −2.3 −2.3 −2.4 −2.3 −2.4

−2.3 −2.3 −2.3 −2.6 −2.4 −2.5 −2.1 −2.0 −2.1 −2.0 −2.2 −2.2 −2.1 −2.0 −2.1 −2.4 −2.3 −2.2 −2.4 −2.3 −2.3 −2.4 −2.3 −2.4

imperial_000 facesoft_000

−2.2 −2.2 −2.3 −2.5 −2.3 −2.4 −2.2 −2.1 −2.2 −2.1 −2.2 −2.3 −2.1 −2.0 −2.2 −2.3 −2.4 −2.2 −2.4 −2.3 −2.3 −2.4 −2.3 −2.4

−2.3 −2.3 −2.3 −2.6 −2.4 −2.4 −2.3 −2.1 −2.2 −2.2 −2.3 −2.3 −2.2 −2.0 −2.2 −2.4 −2.5 −2.3 −2.3 −2.2 −2.2 −2.4 −2.3 −2.3

ntechlab_007

−2.3 −2.3 −2.3 −2.6 −2.4 −2.5 −2.2 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.2 −2.4 −2.1 −2.0 −2.2 −2.4 −2.5 −2.3 −2.4 −2.3 −2.3 −2.4 −2.3 −2.4

imperial_002 alphaface_001

−2.3 −2.3 −2.3 −2.5 −2.3 −2.4 −2.3 −2.1 −2.2 −2.2 −2.3 −2.4 −2.2 −2.0 −2.1 −2.3 −2.3 −2.2 −2.4 −2.3 −2.3 −2.4 −2.4 −2.4

−2.3 −2.3 −2.3 −2.6 −2.4 −2.4 −2.3 −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −2.3 −2.3 −2.2 −2.0 −2.2 −2.4 −2.5 −2.3 −2.4 −2.4 −2.3 −2.4 −2.3 −2.4

hr_002 deepglint_001

−2.3 −2.3 −2.3 −2.6 −2.4 −2.5 −2.2 −2.1 −2.2 −2.2 −2.3 −2.3 −2.2 −2.0 −2.2 −2.4 −2.4 −2.3 −2.4 −2.3 −2.3 −2.4 −2.3 −2.4

−2.3 −2.2 −2.3 −2.6 −2.4 −2.5 −2.3 −2.3 −2.3 −2.2 −2.3 −2.3 −2.2 −2.1 −2.2 −2.4 −2.4 −2.3 −2.3 −2.3 −2.3 −2.4 −2.3 −2.4

visionlabs_007 visionlabs_006 didiglobalface_001

−2.4 −2.4 −2.5 −2.6 −2.4 −2.5 −2.5 −2.3 −2.3 −2.3 −2.4 −2.5 −2.3 −2.2 −2.2 −2.4 −2.3 −2.2 −2.3 −2.2 −2.1 −2.4 −2.3 −2.3

−2.4 −2.3 −2.4 −2.7 −2.5 −2.5 −2.3 −2.2 −2.3 −2.3 −2.3 −2.5 −2.2 −2.3 −2.3 −2.5 −2.6 −2.4 −2.5 −2.4 −2.4 −2.5 −2.5 −2.5

−2.4 −2.4 −2.4 −2.8 −2.5 −2.5 −2.3 −2.2 −2.3 −2.3 −2.4 −2.5 −2.2 −2.2 −2.3 −2.5 −2.7 −2.4 −2.5 −2.5 −2.5 −2.5 −2.5 −2.5

2_El_Salvador

2_Nicaragua

7_Phillippines

7_Vietnam

6_Iraq

7_China

6_Iran

7_Thailand

2_Mexico

5_Ethiopia

7_Korea

7_Japan

6_Pakistan

1_Ukraine

1_Poland

1_Russia

6_India

4_Jamaica

3_Ghana

5_Kenya

3_Nigeria

4_Haiti

3_Liberia

5_Somalia

Country of birth

Figure 22: For 24 countries in seven regions the ﬁgure shows veriﬁcation false non-match rates when the reference algorithm is used to compare two photos of subjects from the countries identiﬁed in the respective columns. The FNMR value is the mean over men/women and over/under age 45, so represents FNMR in situations where those four populations were balanced. The threshold is set to a ﬁxed value everywhere; is is the lowest value that gives FMR ≤0.00001. Each cell depicts FNMR on a logarithmic scale. The text value is log10(FNMR) with large negative values encoding superior false match rates.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 61

6 False negative differentials in identiﬁcation

The three identiﬁcation trials all use just mugshot photographs. They were conceived of to isolate speciﬁc

demographic factors as follows.

▷Sex: We construct a gallery containing 800 000 white men, and 800 000 white women, aged 20 - 40. We

search that with mated probes taken in a different calendar year to the enrolled photo but no longer than

5 years after. We search with balanced sets of non-mate probes, also aged 20-40.

▷Sex: We construct a gallery containing 500 000 black men, and 500 000 black women, aged 20 - 40. We

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

search that with mated probes taken in a different calendar year to the enrolled photo but no longer than

5 years after. We search with balanced sets of non-mate probes, also aged 20-40.

▷Race: We construct a gallery containing 800 000 black men, and 800 000 white men, aged 20 - 40. We

search that with mated probes taken in a different calendar year to the enrolled photo but no longer than

5 years after. We search with balanced sets of non-mate probes, also aged 20-40.

More detail appears in Annex 16 . In each case the mated probes are used to measure false negative identiﬁca-

tion rate, and the nonmated probes are used to measure false positive identiﬁcation rate. These tests all employ

domestic mugshots, and only younger adults. Further work will extend analysis to a global population with

more range in age.

6.1 Metrics

The metrics appropriate to identiﬁcation have been detailed in section 3.2. These are related to particular

applications in Figure 23 reﬂecting two modes of operation. The general metric FNIR(N, R, T) covers both as

follows:

▷Investigation: For investigators willing to traverse long candidate lists in pursuit of a lead, the metric

FNIR(N, R, 0) is the proportion of missed mates when searching an N-enrollee gallery and considering

the R most similar candidates without applying a threshold (T = 0). The utility of longer lists is shown

by plotting FNIR vs. R.

▷Identiﬁcation: For those applications where a non-zero threshold is used to only return results when a

search has a likely enrolled mate, the metric is FNMR(N, R, T). The use of thresholds T > 0 will suppress

many false positives, but will also elevate false negatives, the tradeoff being shown as a plot of FNIR(T)

vs. FPIR(T).

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 62

Search Photo

Alice

Bob

Automated face recognition engine evaluated as black box.

Ben

Detection and

localization Feature extraction

Eve

The enrollment database consists of images and any biographic data.

e.g. CNN model

Dawn

Sam

Feature extraction

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

e.g. CNN model

Alex

Eva

This grey box is the scope of NIST’s evaluation.

Enrolled database: Array, tree, index or other data structure

Search Algorithm e.g. N comparisons

Pat

Jack

The algorithm is given the images and and a pointer to the record

Jill

Bill

Output is a candidate list. Its length is determined by preset configuration of

Zeke

rank and threshold, and these are set to implement objectives.

Zack

ID Rank Score Pat 1 3.142 Usually the correct response is for one entry as most searches

ID Rank Score

ID Rank Score Pat 1 3.142 Bob 2 2.998 Ben 3 1.602 Zeke 4 0.707 ...

Usually correct response is empty list as most searches are

will be mated

non-mated

Positive identification Negative identification Post-event investigation

Example Access to a gym or cruise ship Watchlist e.g. Detection of deportee or duplicate drivers license applications

Crime scene photos, or of detainee without ID documents.

Claim of identity Implicit claim to be enrolled Implicit claim to not be enrolled No claim: Inquiry

Threshold High, to implement security objective

High, to limit false positives Zero

Num. candidates 1 0 L, set by request to algorithm

Human role Review candidate to assist user in resolution of false negatives, or to detect impostor

Review candidate to determine false positive or correct hit

Review multiple candidates, refer possible hits to examiners see [26]

Intended human involvement frequency

Rare – approx. the false negative identification rate plus prior probability of impostor

Rare – approx. the false positive identification rate plus prior probability of an actual mate

Always

Performance metric of interest

FNIR at low FPIR. See sec. 3.1, 3.2 and Tables 10, 19

FNIR at low FPIR. See sec. 3.1, 3.2 and Tables 10, 19

FNIR at ranks 1... 50, say. FPIR = 1. See sec. 3.2 and Table 12, 14, 16

Figure 23: Identiﬁcation applications and relevant metrics.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 63

6.2 Results

Figures 24 and 25 show identiﬁcation error rates for two algorithms. Plots for all algorithms are included in

Annex 16 . In each case, the upper panels show FNIR vs R. The lower panels show FNIR vs. FPIR. We make

the following observations

▷Differentials by race in men: From the left-side panels, black men invariably give lower false negative

identiﬁcation rates than white men. This applies in the investigate and identiﬁcation modes, and par-

ticularly for the more accurate algorithms. The differentials are often small, well below a factor of two.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

The are some exceptions including algorithms from 3DiVi, Aware, Eyedea, Idemia, Kedacom, Tevian and

Vocord.

▷Differentials between the sexes: Women invariably give higher false negative rates than men. This applies

within both racial groups. There are exceptions, notably that searches of white women are more likely

to produce the correct result in the top ranks than are search of men. This is less true for black women.

A possible mechanism for this is available from section 4 veriﬁcation results, namely that black women

tend to produce high one-to-one false match rates. High non-mate scores may be displacing the correct

black women from rank 1 position.

▷Low FPIR is not attainable: The error tradeoff characteristics show a rapid increase FNIR as the threshold

is increased to reduce FPIR. For example, in FNIR Figure 24, FNIR reaches 50% when FPIR is reduced to

0.0001. This is due to the presence of high scoring non-mates in the imposter searches. They can occur

for several reasons. First, ground truth identity labeling errors in which photos of a person are in the

database under multiple IDs. These cause apparent false positives. We discount this because the mugshot

ground truth integrity is excellent, and underpinned by ten-print ﬁngerprint matching. A second reason

is the presence of twins in the population. Given the population represented by the dataset, we estimate

a few percent of the United States adult population is present in the dataset. Given well documented

twinning rates14 [27], we expect twins to be in the data, both identical and, more commonly, fraternal.

Siblings will be expected to give elevated similarities along the same lines.

▷Higher false positive identiﬁcation rates in black women: The lines connecting points of ﬁxed threshold

are often long and slanted in the error tradeoff plots in the center column of the bottom row - see Figure

24, for example. This is a common occurence revealing an order-of-magnitude increase in FPIR, with

magnitudes varying by algorithm. Notably some algorithms do not exhibit this excursion. For example,

the algorithm featured in Figure 25 gives much smaller excursions in FPIR.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 64

reports/1N/figures/fbi/ngi/race_sex/cmcs_dets/imperial_000.pdf

BW_male_20_40_balanced MF_black_20_40_balanced MF_white_20_40_balanced

False negative identification rate (FNIR)

0.005

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

race

Black White

0.003

Dataset: MUGSHOTS

0.002

Female Male

1 3 10 30 50 1 3 10 30 50 1 3 10 30 50

Rank

race

BW_male_20_40_balanced MF_black_20_40_balanced MF_white_20_40_balanced

False negative identification rate, FNIR(T)

Black White

0.500 0.700

0.300

0.200

Thresholds 1.743 1.588 1.531 1.454 set for white males for FPIR 0.0003 0.0030 0.0300 0.3000

0.050 0.070 0.100

0.030

0.020

0.005 0.007 0.010

0.003

0.002

Female Male

0.001

1e−04

3e−04

1e−03

3e−03

1e−02

3e−02

1e−01

3e−01

1e+00

1e−04

3e−04

1e−03

3e−03

1e−02

3e−02

1e−01

3e−01

1e+00

1e−04

3e−04

1e−03

3e−03

1e−02

3e−02

1e−01

3e−01

1e+00

False positive identification rate, FPIR(T)

Figure 24: For mugshot identiﬁcation, the top row shows false negative identiﬁcation “miss” rates as a function of rank, a metric appropriate to investigators traversing candidate lists for lead generation. The bottom row shows miss rates as a function of false positive identiﬁcation rate, where a threshold is swept from a low value on the right to high values on the left. This metric is appropriate to organizations for which the volume of searches is high enough that they cannot afford labor to review results from every search. The left panels show the effect of race in young men. The center and right panels show difference between men and women, in black then white subjects respectively. The grey lines join points of equal threshold. The four thresholds are chosen to give FPIR of {0.0003, 0.003, 0.03, 0.3} respectively for one baseline demographic, here white males. The ﬁgure applies to one algorithm, provided to NIST in August 2019. The corresponding ﬁgures for all identiﬁcation algorithms appear in Annex 16 .

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 65

reports/1N/figures/fbi/ngi/race_sex/cmcs_dets/idemia_4.pdf

BW_male_20_40_balanced MF_black_20_40_balanced MF_white_20_40_balanced

False negative identification rate (FNIR)

0.020

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

race

Black White

0.010

Dataset: MUGSHOTS

0.007

Female Male

0.005

1 3 10 30 50 1 3 10 30 50 1 3 10 30 50

Rank

race

BW_male_20_40_balanced MF_black_20_40_balanced MF_white_20_40_balanced

False negative identification rate, FNIR(T)

Black White

0.700

0.500

0.300

0.200

Thresholds 2179.743 1637.344 1337.657 1011.930 set for white males for FPIR 0.0003 0.0030 0.0300 0.3000

0.100

0.070

0.050

0.030

0.020

0.010

0.007

0.005

Female Male

1e−04

3e−04

1e−03

3e−03

1e−02

3e−02

1e−01

3e−01

1e+00

1e−04

3e−04

1e−03

3e−03

1e−02

3e−02

1e−01

3e−01

1e+00

1e−04

3e−04

1e−03

3e−03

1e−02

3e−02

1e−01

3e−01

1e+00

False positive identification rate, FPIR(T)

Figure 25: For mugshot identiﬁcation, the top row shows false negative identiﬁcation “miss” rates as a function of rank, a metric appropriate to investigators traversing candidate lists for lead generation. The bottom row shows miss rates as a function of false positive identiﬁcation rate, where a threshold is swept from a low value on the right to high values on the left. This metric is appropriate to organizations for which the volume of searches is high enough that they cannot afford labor to review results from every search. The left panels show the effect of race in young men. The center and right panels show difference between men and women, in black then white subjects respectively. The grey lines join points of equal threshold. The four thresholds are chosen to give FPIR of {0.0003, 0.003, 0.03, 0.3} respectively for one baseline demographic, here white males. The ﬁgure applies to one algorithm, provided to NIST in June 2018. The corresponding ﬁgures for all identiﬁcation algorithms appear in Annex 16 .

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 66

7 False positive differentials in identiﬁcation

The section addresses whether identiﬁcation algorithms exhibit similar false positive differentials to veriﬁ-

cation algorithms. We ﬁrst note that large-scale one-to-many identiﬁcation deployments typically operate at

false match rates much lower than those targeted in veriﬁcation applications. It is typical in veriﬁcation access

control to target false match rates (FMR) between 0.00001 and 0.001, i.e. between one per hundred thousand

and one per thousand. Identiﬁcation applications, howveer, often enroll very large numbers of individuals

numbering into the 10s or 100s of millions. If such systems are conﬁgured with thresholds aimed at producing

false positive outcomes say one in 100 times, i.e. FPIR = 0.01, then the implied likelihood that a comparison

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

will yield a false match is given by this formula

FMR = FPIR

N (10)

where N is the size of the enrolled population. With FPIR= 0.01, and N= 106s this formula implies FMR=

10−8. The formula gives a ﬁrst order equivalence of identiﬁcation with veriﬁcation: the former needs low false

positive rates in large galleries. Metrics are discussed in section 3.

Some one-to-many search algorithms implement a 1:N search of a probe image as N 1:1 comparisons of the

probe with the N enrolled items. This is followed by a sort operation which yields N candidates sorted in

decreasing order of similarity. The result of that is returned in either of two ways: The system will return an

operator-speciﬁed number of candidates, or it will return however many candidates are above an operator-

speciﬁed threshold15. In the case where a threshold is used, the number of candidates returned will be a

random-variable that is dependent on the image data itself.

Other algorithms do not implement 1:N search as N 1:1 comparisons. Instead they might employ a set of fast-

search algorithms aimed at expediting search [2, 19, 21, 26]. These include various techniques to partition the

enrollment data so that far fewer than N comparisons are actually executed. However, this does not mean that

false positive occurences will be reduced because the algorithms are still tasked with ﬁnding the most similar

enrollments.

For the three experiments listed in section 6, Figure 26 shows median scores returned by one identiﬁcation

algorithm when non-mated searches are conducted. It is clear that if a threshold is applied there will be

demographic differences in the number of candidates returned, and in the score values. Such behavior applies

to many algorithms - see Annex 17 .

This effect disappears in the algorithm featured in Figure 27. This is an important result because it implies

much more equitable likelihoods of false positives. This is especially important result in negative identiﬁcation

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 67

reports/1N/figures/fbi/ngi/natural/score_heatmaps_by_rank_and_demographics/ntechlab_6.pdf

N = 12000000 N = 1600000

0

Dataset MUGSHOT

lifetime_consolidated recent

10

20

Algorithm ntechlab_6

30

NONMATE

40

50

Rank

0.750

0

10

0.725

20

30

0.700

40

50

Asian Female

Asian

Black Female

Black

White Female

White

Asian Female

Asian

Black Female

Black

White Female

White

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

Male

Male

Male

Male

Male

Male

N = 12000000 N = 1600000

0

lifetime_consolidated recent

10

MATE

20

0.90

30

40

0.85

50

Rank

0.80

0

10

0.75

20

0.70

30

40

50

Asian Female

Asian

Black Female

Black

White Female

White

Asian Female

Asian

Black Female

Black

White Female

White

Male

Male

Male

Male

Male

Male

Demographics of search subject

Figure 26: For searches of Asian, black, white men and women’s faces into mixed galleries of mugshot photos the heatmaps show median similarity scores for candidates placed at rank 1 to 50. The upper four panels are produced in nonmated searches; the lower four from mated searches. The left-side panels are produced from searches into galleries with 12 000 000 people enrolled. The right-side uses galleries with N = 1 600 000 enrolled. The “lifetime consolidated” and “recent” labels refer to inclusion of multiple images per person, or just one - see [17]. Contrast the behavior here with that in Figure 27 and the corresponding ﬁgures for developers Aware, Idemia, NEC, Tevian, and Toshiba that are included in Annex 17 .

applications where the prior probability of a searched person actually being is in the database is low, e.g. card-

sharp surveillance in a casino, or soccer hooligans at a sports game16. The lack of an effect on false positive

identiﬁcation rates is evident in Figure 25 where the grey lines join points of equal threshold. From left-to-

right, the FPIR values for black and white males, black men and women, and white men and women are

closely similar. The more normal behavior (see Figure 24 and Annex 16 ) is for larger shifts in false positive

rates.

We now consider the implications for investigative “lead generation” applications. In such cases, algorithms

return a ﬁxed number of candidates and human reviewers compare the probe photo alongside each candidate

gallery photo to determine if the photos are a match. In mugshot-mugshot searches the reviewer will very

often look no further than rank 1 per the very high accuracy results documented in NIST Interagency Report

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 68

reports/1N/figures/fbi/ngi/natural/score_heatmaps_by_rank_and_demographics/idemia_5.pdf

N = 12000000 N = 1600000

0

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

Dataset MUGSHOT

lifetime_consolidated recent

10

20

Algorithm idemia_5

30

NONMATE

40

800

50

Rank

600

0

10

400

20

30

200

40

0

50

Asian Female

Asian

Black Female

Black

White Female

White

Asian Female

Asian

Black Female

Black

White Female

White

Male

Male

Male

Male

Male

Male

N = 12000000 N = 1600000

0

lifetime_consolidated recent

10

MATE

20

30

5000

40

4000

50

Rank

3000

0

2000

10

20

1000

30

0

40

50

Asian Female

Asian

Black Female

Black

White Female

White

Asian Female

Asian

Black Female

Black

White Female

White

Male

Male

Male

Male

Male

Male

Demographics of search subject

Figure 27: For searches of Asian, black, white men and women’s faces into mixed galleries of mugshot photos the heatmaps show median similarity scores for candidates placed at rank 1 to 50. The upper four panels are produced in nonmated searches; the lower four from mated searches. The left-side panels are produced from searches into galleries with 12 000 000 people enrolled. The right-side uses galleries with N = 1 600 000 enrolled. The “lifetime consolidated” and “recent” labels refer to inclusion of multiple images per person, or just one - see [17]. The uniformity of the scores across demographic groups is in contrast to that evident in Figure 26 and many others in the Annex 17 compendium.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 69

8271. That report also includes a workload measure summarizing the expected number of candidates that will

have to be reviewed before a mate is located. A very important parameter in such applications, however, is

the prior probability that a mate is actually present. In boarding a cruise ship for example, almost everyone

attempting to board would be present in the gallery. In a casino application aimed at detecting “high rollers”

the likelihood a patron of the casino is in that set is much lower. In such cases a human reviewer, if so employed,

would in most searches review all say 50 candidates on the list. That’s laborious and may not be tenable from

an operations research perspective due to fatigue and reward factors in humans.

But in whatever circumstances human reviewers are tasked with reviewing candidate lists, how are demo-

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

graphic differentials such as those in Figure 26 expected to inﬂuence the human? The human will see ﬁfty

candidates regardless. However, if those candidates are accompanied by scores, presented as text in a GUI for

example, the reviewer will see higher scores in the black female population and potentially elsewhere. Over

time this may inﬂuence the human, though one earlier study [12] looked at cognitive bias issues in the hu-

man review of ﬁngerprint search results, without demographic effects, and found scant evidence that scores

inﬂuence the reviewer. That study did, however, ﬁnd that just the order in which candidates are presented to

reviewers affects both false positives and false negatives. For example, reviewers are more likely to miss (i.e.

a false negative) a mated candidate that appears far down the candidate list. The issues involved in human

review are beyond the scope of this document, but full consideration of systems comprised of automated face

search algorithms and human reviewers is an experimental psychology, human factors and operations research

issue.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 70

8 Research toward mitigation of false negatives

False negative error rates, and demographic differentials therein, are reduced in standards-compliant images.

This motivates the following two research and development possibilities.

▷Improved standards compliance: The ISO/IEC 19794-5 standard includes requirements regulating geom-

etry and exposure. Recent research [24] noted that higher quality images, as determined by an automated

quality assessment algorithm, yields a reduced false negative differential. While commercial packages exist

for the automated assessment of quality, and NIST has an ongoing assessment of the underlying algorithms,

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

rejection of single images on quality grounds can itself have demographic problems [1]. The ISO/IEC SC 37

biometrics subcommittee has recently initiated work on quality (ISO/IEC 29794-5 and 24357).

▷Face-aware cameras: The same ISO/IEC committee has recently initiated work on speciﬁcations for cap-

ture subsystems that may require real-time face detection, pose estimation, and exposure measurement.

Analogous “auto-capture” quality control mechanisms exist in iris and ﬁngerprint scanners. That standard,

ISO/IEC 24358, will be developed through 2020 with completion expected in 2021. Participation is open via

national standardization groups.

Along similar lines further research into automated image quality assessment, and particularly speciﬁcations

for closed-loop face-aware capture would prove valuable in averting low-contrast and over- and under-

exposed images. Many enrollment operations still rely on documentary photography standards with cam-

eras that are not detecting and metering off faces.

This work would be supported by research into two further topics:

Analysis: There is a need for improved models of demographic effects, particularly to how subject-speciﬁc

properties including phenotypes, imaging artefacts and algorithms interact. Such models would extend work

[9] in separating the relative contributions of at least, sex, age, race and height. Efforts to automatically esti-

mate phenotypic information from images will involve algorithms that may themselves exhibit demographic

differentials. Such work will need to address this possibility.

Information theoretic analysis: Given the potential for poorly illuminated photographs to produce false neg-

atives, via under- or over-exposure of dark or light skin, an information theoretic approach to characterize

algorithmic response to poor lighting would be useful for future standardization. In particular, the ISO/IEC

19794-5 standard has, since 2004, required portrait photos to have at least 7 bits of content in each color channel.

Such work should quantify both false negative and false positive dependence.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 71

9 Research toward mitigation of false positives

9.1 Summary

The threshold manipulation strategies described above would be irrelevant if the algorithm developer pro-

vided software with homogeneous false match rates. That will prove impossible as there will always be some

distribution around a mean - the goal should be much more homogeneous false match rates than is currently

the case.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

9.2 Algorithm training

A longer-term mitigation is prompted by our observation that many algorithms developed in China do not give

the elevated false positive rates on Chinese faces that algorithms developed elsewhere do. This afﬁrms a prior

ﬁnding of an “other-race effect” for algorithms [33] though that paper did not separate false positive from false

negative shifts. This suggests that training data, or perhaps some other factor intrinsic to the development,

can be effective at reducing particular false positive differentials. Thus, the longer-term mitigation would be

for developers to investigate the utility of more diverse, globally derived, training data. Absent such data,

developers might consider whether their cost functions can be altered to reduce differentials. One developer

advanced such a concept in November 2018 [15].

9.3 Greater discriminative power

Face recognition algorithms measure similarity between face images. Facial appearance is partially determined

by genes, the phenotypic expression of which determines skin tone and a large set of characteristics related to

shape of the face. In NIST recognition tests [17], identical twins invariably cause false positives at all practical

operational thresholds. Twins are characterized by very similar features given identical genes. Similarities in

faces in fraternal twins [17] are expected to extend also to siblings (which also share half of the genes), and

then to more distant relatives. In 2004, an algorithm was patented that can correctly distinguish twins [US

Patent: US7369685B2]; it operates by extracting features from skin texture (adjacent to the nose, and above

the eyebrows). This algorithm requires high resolution and, moreover, knowledge that any given image has

that resolution. However, contemporary deployments of face recognition are very often based on processing

of images at or below VGA spatial sampling rates (i.e., 480 x 640 pixel images), and this is often insufﬁcient

for skin texture to be viable. The human reviewer community has long speciﬁed much higher resolution for

forensic purposes (see ANSI/NIST Face Acquisition Proﬁles).

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 72

9.4 Collection and use of face and iris

The texture of the human iris is known to have a structure that when imaged and processed by published

feature extraction algorithms [11,29] will correctly discriminate between identical twins [40] - something that

contemporary marketplace face algorithms do not [17]. The reason for this appears to be that the iris features

detected by automated algorithms are not genetically determined. However genetics research [25] does show

iris textures have some genetic linkage, so a better characterisation of the tails of the impostor distribution is

needed, at least for large scale one-to-many identiﬁcation. Nevertheless, a 2019 DHS Science and Technology

study noted that false positives are no higher within individuals of the same sex, age and race as they are

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

across those groups [39]. As shown in Figure 4 and Annex 8 that is not the case for face recognition. NIST has

near-term plans to investigate the impostor distribution in twins more fully.

Given the marketplace presence of multiple cameras that collect face and iris essentially simultaneously, one

approach to consider for mitigation of false positive differentials in face recognition would be for face records

to include adjunct iris images. The standards infrastructure is in place for this (ANSI/NIST Type 17, ISO/IEC

39794-6, and ICAO 9303 Data Group 4). This would afford very low false positive rates.

The apparent lack of genetic inﬂuence, and demonstrated low false match likelihoods, has been the primary

property in establishing the use of the iris for the identiﬁcation of individuals in large populations - most

notably in the Indian National ID program Aadhaar. The iris recognition industry has multiple camera devel-

opers, multiple algorithm suppliers, and image interchange and quality standards that support interoperable

recognition across cameras.

These aspects afford solutions to higher and heterogeneous false positive rates in face recognition. The ﬁrst is

simply to replace face with iris. There would be advantages and disadvantages to this - detailing and weighing

those is beyond our scope here. However a second solution would be to augment face with iris, to produce

a compound biometric “face-and-iris”17. This is made possible by the marketplace availability for at least a

decade now of cameras that collect iris and face images essentially simultaneously. Recognition of the com-

bined biometric would involve a particular kind of biometric fusion that in which both the face and iris must

match (against respective thresholds) so as to limit false positives. This differs from some convenience-driven

implementations that authenticate a person with either face or iris alone.

Use of iris in some applications, for example surveillance, is limited by the difﬁculty and expense of imaging

the iris at long distances.

We don’t mention ﬁngerprints in this context because even though genetic inﬂuence is considered to be absent

17Such a compound biometric would conventionally still require collection of two images: First an iris image with near infrared illumination and the face image either entirely in ambient light, or ambient light with a near infrared component. The recognition of irises in purely visible-light images is highly problematic in brown-eyed people as melanin in the iris absorbs incident light at visible wavelengths.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 73

False Non-Match Rate (FNMR)

Demographic Y

P3

Demographic X

T2

∆FNMRY

P2

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

P4

∆FNMRX

T1

P1

∆FMRX

FMR POLICY

False Match Rate (FMR)

Figure 28: The ﬁgure shows the increases in FNMR implied by increasing the operating threshold to achieve the target FMR on the high-FMR demographic, Y.

or minimal, the collection of both ﬁngerprint and face is not simultaneous.

9.5 Threshold elevation

We detail one mitigation of heterogeneous variable false match rates, and its consequences, as follows. The

explanation uses a graphical construct based on the error tradeoff characteristics shown in Figure 28.

▷We start with a target false match rate FMRPOLICY that has been set to implement some security ob-

jective. This value, in a veriﬁcation application might reasonably be set to say 1 in 5000 (i.e. 0.0002).

This is implemented by setting a threshold T1. Suppose that this threshold was perfectly calibrated for

Demographic X i.e. FMR(T1) = FMRPOLICY. This corresponds to the point P1.

▷Now suppose that we later discover, perhaps as a result of some biometric performance test or audit

that, for some new group Demographic Y, that the observed false match rate at the ﬁxed threshold T1 is

much higher, a factor of ﬁve say (0.001). This point P2 therefore represents therefore a failure to meet the

original security objective for that group.

▷To bring the overall system into policy compliance, the system owner consults the error tradeoff charac-

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 74

False Non-

Match

Demographic Z

Rate (FNMR)

Demographic Y

TZ

TY

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

Demographic X

TX TX

TX

FMR POLICY

False Match Rate (FMR)

Figure 29: The ﬁgure shows the effect of setting thresholds to achieve the target FMR on demographics X and Y.

teristic for Demographic Y and notes that by elevating the threshold to T2, the false match rate would be

returned to policy compliance, at point P3.

▷The effect of this however is that FNMR is necessarily elevated both demographic groups. This is be-

cause the new threshold T2 is higher than T1, and applies to all transactions from all demographics.

These increases are shown as ∆FNMRX and ∆FNMRY would have a magnitude that depends on the

gradients of the error-tradeoff characteristics (which may differ). The only gain is a reduction in FMR for

Demographic X, to a value which beats the original target policy.

Using this kind of construct, we see the beneﬁt in having a biometric algorithm for which false match rates are

homogenous i.e. do not vary (much) over any demographics.

The above argument assumes that the original high FMRY(T1) is indeed problematic. It may be tolerable in

cases where individuals in that Demographic are rare, e.g. elderly persons entering a gym or nightclub. Any

decision to not elevate the threshold to T2 should be deliberated in the security context deﬁned by threat, risk

and cost.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 75

9.6 Explicit thresholds for each demographic

In this section we discuss the suggestion [23] to address heterogeneous false match rates by assigning a thresh-

old to each demographic. The proposal is for a veriﬁcation system to set the threshold each time a subject

executes a veriﬁcation transaction tailoring it on the basis of who is using the system. Referencing Figure 29,

this would correspond to adopting thresholds T1 and T2 (i.e. points P1 and P3) on-the-ﬂy. How to do this

presents a problem. Naively one could encode in an identity document (e.g. a passport) some indication of

the demographic group (e.g. female, middle aged, south Asian) and the system would read this information,

consult a lookup table, and set T accordingly. This would be effective for genuine legitimate users of the sys-

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

tem. The security consequences of this are, however, more complicated. Consider what an imposter would do

given knowledge that thresholds are variable.

▷If the imposter were from a demographic for which the threshold is low, he would procure / steal a

credential from somebody of the same age, sex and ethnicity. This would be typical behavior for any

imposter. However, if particular countries passports were known to be used with low-thresholds, we’d

expect genesis of a black-market for stolen credentials in those places.

▷If the imposter were from a demographic for which the threshold is high he might procure / steal a

credential from somebody in one of the low-threshold demographics, matching age and sex minimally

the same sex. To better induce a false match the imposter would still need to have the same age, sex and

ethnicity. This would be typical behavior anyway.

Note that societal construction will often naturally afford opportunities for imposters to have access to

identity credentials from other persons who, naturally, have the same ethnicity, sex and age group.

Another aspect to this approach is that it shifts responsibility for threshold management to the system owner

rather than the developer. That may sound fully appropriate but imposes two responsibilities on the operator:

First, ﬁguring out what the thresholds should be via some appropriate testing, and secondly to implement the

strategy with capture of demographic information and use of that in software.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 76

References

[1] December 2016. https://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/2016/12/07/robot-passport-checker-rejects-

asian-mans-photo-having-eyes/.

[2] Artem Babenko and Victor Lempitsky. Efﬁcient indexing of billion-scale datasets of deep descriptors. In

The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2016.

[3] L. Best-Rowden and A. K. Jain. Longitudinal study of automatic face recognition. IEEE Transactions on

Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 40(1):148–162, Jan 2018.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

[4] J. Ross Beveridge, Geof H. Givens, P. Jonathon Phillips, and Bruce A. Draper. Factors that inﬂuence

algorithm performance in the face recognition grand challenge. Computer Vision and Image Understanding,

113(6):750–762, 2009.

[5] Joy Buolamwini. Gender shades: Intersectional phenotypic and demographic evaluation of face datasets

and gender classiﬁers. Technical report, MIT Media Lab, 01 2017.

[6] J. Campbell and M. Savastano. Iso/iec 22116 identifying and mitigating the differential impact of de-

mographic factors in biometric systems. Technical report, ISO/IEC JTC 1, SC 37, Working Group 6,

http://iso.org/standard/72604.html, 11 2018.

[7] Jacqueline G. Cavazos, Eilidh Noyes, and Alice J. O’Toole. Learning context and the other-race effect:

Strategies for improving face recognition. Vision Research, 157:169 – 183, 2019. Face perception: Experience,

models and neural mechanisms.

[8] Jacqueline G. Cavazos, P. Jonathon Phillips, Carlos D. Castillo, and Alice J. O’Toole. Accuracy

comparison across face recognition algorithms: Where are we on measuring race bias? In

https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.07398, 12 2019.

[9] Cynthia Cook, John Howard, Yevgeniy Sirotin, Jerry Tipton, and Arun Vemury. Demographic effects

in facial recognition and their dependence on image acquisition: An evaluation of eleven commercial

systems. IEEE Transactions on Biometrics, Behavior, and Identity Science, PP:1–1, 02 2019.

[10] White D., Kemp R. I., Jenkins R., Matheson M, and Burton A. M. Passport ofﬁcers errors in face matching.

PLoS ONE, 9(8), 2014. e103510. doi:10.1371/journal. pone.0103510.

[11] J. Daugman. How iris recognition works. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology,

14(1):21–30, Jan 2004.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 77

[12] Itiel Dror and Kasey Wertheim. Quantiﬁed assessment of aﬁs contextual information on accuracy and

reliability of subsequent examiner conclusions. Technical Report 235288, National Institute of Justice, July

2011.

[13] H El Khiyari and Wechsler H. Face veriﬁcation subject to varying (age, ethnicity, and gender) demo-

graphics using deep learning. Journal of Biometrics and Biostatistics, 7:323, 11 2016. doi:10.4172/2155-

6180.1000323.

[14] C. Garvie, A. Bedoya, and J. Frankle. The perpetual line-up: Unregulated police face recognition in

america. Technical report, Georgetown University Law School, Washington, DC, 10 2018.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

[15] St´ephane Gentric. Face recognition evaluation @ idemia. In Proc. International Face Performance Conference,

National Institute of Standards and Technology NIST, Gaithersburg, MD, November 2018.

[16] Patrick Grother, Mei Ngan, and Kayee Hanaoka. Face recognition vendor test (frvt) part 1: Veri-

ﬁcation. Interagency Report DRAFT, National Institute of Standards and Technology, October 2019.

https://nist.gov/programs-projects/frvt-11-veriﬁcation.

[17] Patrick Grother, Mei Ngan, and Kayee Hanaoka. Face recognition vendor test (frvt) part 2: Identi-

ﬁcation. Interagency Report 8271, National Institute of Standards and Technology, September 2019.

https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8271.

[18] Patrick Grother, George W. Quinn, and Mei Ngan. Face recognition vendor test - still face image and

video concept, evaluation plan and api. Technical report, National Institute of Standards and Technology,

7 2013. http://biometrics.nist.gov/cs links/face/frvt/frvt2012/NIST FRVT2012 api Aug15.pdf.

[19] Feng Hao, John Daugman, and Piotr Zielinski. A fast search algorithm for a large fuzzy database. IEEE

Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 3(2):203–212, 2008.

[20] John J. Howard, Yevgeniy Sirotin, and Arun Vermury. The effect of broad and speciﬁc demographic ho-

mogeneity on the imposter distributions and false match rates in face recognition algorithm performance.

In Proc. 10-th IEEE International Conference on Biometrics Theory, Applications and Systems, BTAS 2019, Tampa

Florida,USA, September 2019.

[21] Masato Ishii, Hitoshi Imaoka, and Atsushi Sato. Fast k-nearest neighbor search for face identiﬁcation

using bounds of residual score. In 2017 12th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture

Recognition (FG 2017), pages 194–199, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, May 2017. IEEE Computer Society.

[22] B. F. Klare, Burge M. J., Klontz J. C., Vorder Bruegge R. W., and Jain A. K. Face recognition performance:

Role of demographic information. IEEE Trans. on Information Forensics and Security, 7(6):1789–1801, 9 2012.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 78

[23] K. S. Krishnapriya, Kushal Vangara, Michael C. King, Vitor Albiero, and Kevin Bowyer. Charac-

terizing the variability in face recognition accuracy relative to race. CoRR, abs/1904.07325, 2019.

http://arxiv.org/abs/1904.07325.

[24] K. S. Krishnapriya, Kushal Vangara, Michael C. King, Vitor Albiero, and Kevin Bowyer. Us study: better

image quality could cut face system bias. Biometric Technology Today, 2019(5):11 – 12, 2019.

[25] Mats Larsson, David L. Duffy, Gu Zhu, Jimmy Z. Liu, Stuart Macgregor, Allan F. McRae, Margaret J.

Wright, Richard A. Sturm, David A. Mackey, Grant W. Montgomery, Nicholas G. Martin, and Sarah E.

Medland. GWAS ﬁndings for human iris patterns: Associations with variants in genes that inﬂuence

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

normal neuronal pattern development. American Journal of Human Genetics, 89(2):334–343, August 2011.

[26] Yury A. Malkov and D. A. Yashunin. Efﬁcient and robust approximate nearest neighbor search using

hierarchical navigable small world graphs. CoRR, abs/1603.09320, 2016.

[27] Joyce A. Martin, Brady E. Hamilton, Michelle J.K. Osterman, Anne K. Driscoll, , and Patrick Drake. Na-

tional vital statistics reports. Technical Report 8, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National

Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System, Division of Vital Statistics, November 2018.

[28] Dana Michalski, Sau Yee Yiu, and Chris Malec. The impact of age and threshold variation on facial

recognition algorithm performance using images of children. In International Conference on Biometrics,

February 2018.

[29] D. M. Monro, S. Rakshit, and D. Zhang. Dct-based iris recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis

and Machine Intelligence, 29(4):586–595, April 2007.

[30] Vidya Muthukumar. Color-theoretic experiments to understand unequal gender classiﬁcation accuracy

from face images. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2019.

[31] Vidya Muthukumar, Tejaswini Pedapati, Nalini Ratha, Prasanna Sattigeri, Chai-Wah Wu, Brian Kings-

bury, Abhishek Kumar, Samuel Thomas, Aleksandra Mojsilovic, and Kush R. Varshney. Understanding

unequal gender classiﬁcation accuracy from face images. CoRR, abs/1812.00099, November 2018.

[32] P. Jonathon Phillips, J. Beveridge, Bruce Draper, Geof Givens, Alice O’Toole, David Bolme, Joseph Dunlop,

Yui Lui, Hassan Sahibzada, and Samuel Weimer. The good, the bad, and the ugly face challenge problem.

Image and Vision Computing, 30:177185, 03 2012.

[33] P. Jonathon Phillips, Fang Jiang, Abhijit Narvekar, Julianne Ayyad, and Alice J. O’Toole. An other-race

effect for face recognition algorithms. ACM Trans. Appl. Percept., 8(2):14:1–14:11, February 2011.

2019/12/19 08:14:00 FRVT - FACE RECOGNITION VENDOR TEST - DEMOGRAPHICS 79

[34] P. Jonathon Phillips, Amy N. Yates, Ying Hu, Carina A. Hahn, Eilidh Noyes, Kelsey Jackson, Jacque-

line G. Cavazos, G´eraldine Jeckeln, Rajeev Ranjan, Swami Sankaranarayanan, Jun-Cheng Chen, Carlos D.

Castillo, Rama Chellappa, David White, and Alice J. O’Toole. Face recognition accuracy of forensic exam-

iners, superrecognizers, and face recognition algorithms. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,

115(24):6171–6176, 2018.

[35] P.J. Phillips, P. Grother, R. J. Micheals, D. M. Blackburn, E. Tabassi, and M. Bone. Face recogni-

tion vendor test 2002. Evaluation Report IR 6965, National Institute of Standards and Technology,

www.itl.nist.gov/iad/894.03/face/face.html or www.frvt.org, March 2003.

This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280

[36] Inioluwa Raji and Joy Buolamwini. Actionable auditing: Investigating the impact of publicly naming

biased performance results of commercial AI products. In Conference on AI, Ethics and Society, pages 429–

435, 01 2019.

[37] K. Ricanek and T. Tesafaye. Morph: a longitudinal image database of normal adult age-progression. In

7th International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (FGR06), pages 341–345, April 2006.

[38] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition.

In Proc. International Conference on Learning Representations, volume https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556v6,

2015.

[39] Yevgeniy Sirotin. A comparison of demographic effects in face and iris recognition. Technical report, Iris

Experts Group, Gaithersburg, MD, 6 2019.

[40] Zhenan Sun, Alessandra Paulino, Jianjiang Feng, Zhenhua Chai, Tieniu Tan, and Anil Jain. A study of

multibiometric traits in identical twins. Proc. of the International Society of Optical Engineering, 7667, 04 2010.

[41] Darrell M. West. 10 actions that will protect people from facial recognition software. Technical report,

Brookings Institution, Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Emerging Technology Initiative, Washington, DC, 10

2019.

[42] David White, James D. Dunn, Alexandra C. Schmid, and Richard I. Kemp. Error rates in users of automatic

face recognition software. PLoS ONE, October 2015.