Microsoft Word - Document1

Complete Transcript of the Martin Luther King, Jr. Assassination Conspiracy Trial

VOLUME I November 15, 1999 Jury selection begins. It is closed to the public. The Memphis Commercial Appeal is granted permission to file an appeal against the public being excluded for jury selection. VOLUME II November 16, 1999 Testifying:

• Mrs. Coretta Scott King, wife of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., currently-Founder, The Martin Luther King, Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Inc. • Dr. Cobey Smith, founder, The Invaders (Black Organizing Project)-1968, educator consultant (current) • Mr. Charles Cabbage, Executive Secretary, The Invaders • Mr. John McFerren, founder, Fayette County Civic & Welfare League and local businessman • Mr. Nathan Whitlock, taxicab driver, musician • Captain Thomas Smith, Memphis Police Department, Homocide Detective (1968), currently retired • Mr. Charles Hurley, advertising manager, National Food Stores, Memphis (1968), Division Manager, Save-A-Lot Food Stores (current)

VOLUME III November 17, 1999 Testifying:

• Mr. James Milner, taxicab driver • Mr. Floyd Newsom, Memphis Fire Department, retired • Mr. Norville Wallace, Chief, Memphis Fire Department, retired • Mr. Leon Cohen, special deputy at Juvenile Court, took photos around the Lorraine Motel the morning after the assassination, retired • Mr. Ed Redditt, Memphis Police Department, detective, Community Relations Officer, retired, volunteer high school coach • Mr. James McCraw (deceased), taxicab driver, via previous deposition • Mr. Jerry Williams, captain, Memphis Police Department (1968), real estate currently • Mr. Phillip Melanson, professor, political science, author “The Martin Luther King Assassination” • Ms. Kaye Pittman Black, reporter, The Memphis Press Scimitar (1968), via sworn testimony in 1993

VOLUME IV November 18, 1999 Testifying:

• Rev. James Lawson, Jr., SCLC Board Member, Pastor, Centenary United Methodist Church in Memphis (1968), retired • Mr. Maynard Stiles, Division Superintendent, Department of Sanitation, retired • Ms. Olivia Catling, neighborhood resident around Lorraine Motel • Mr. Ed Atkinson, Memphis Police Department, Traffic Division, retired • Mr. Hasel Huckaby, South Central Bell, employee, via sworn statement in 1993 • Mr. James Lesar, lawyer, represented James Earl Ray (1970-76), currently specializes in Freedom of Information Act litigation • The Honorable Andrew J. Young, Executive Vice President of SCLC (in 1968), currently Chairman, GoodWorks International, LLC

VOLUME V November 22, 1999 Testifying:

• Videotape of the meeting between Loyd Jowers, Dexter Scott King, Andrew J. Young and Lewis Garrison, Little Rock, AR • Mr. Arthur Haynes, Jr., James Earl Ray’s first attorney (with his father), currently, Circuit Judge 10th Judicial Circuit, AL • Ms. Bobbie Balfour, Jim’s Grill, employee, currently a cook • Mr. William R. Key, Clerk of Court, Shelby County • Mr. Joe B. Brown, Judge, 30th Judicial District, State of TN, Division 9, Criminal Court, Shelby County

VOLUME VI November 23, 1999 Testifying:

• Dr. Jerry Francisco, professor of pathology, University of TN, Shelby County Medical Examiner (1968 and currently) • Mr. John Billings, surgical assistant, St. Joseph’s Hospital (1968), private investigator (current) • Mr. Royce Wilburn, master electrician (1968present), brother of Ms. Glenda Grabow • Mr. Sidney J. Carthew, merchant seaman, British Merchant Navy, via teleconference deposition in

1999 • Mr. Joe B. Hodges, Memphis Police Department, dog squad (1968), retired • Mr. James W. Smith, Memphis Police Department, special services (1968) • Ms. Barbara Reis, journalist, Publico newspaper, Portugal • Rev. James Orange, Executive Staff, SCLC, via previous affadavit

VOLUME VII November 24, 1999 Testifying:

• Mr. Jack Saltman, television producer, BBC, Thames, HBO, and ABC- TV • Dr. Clayborne Carson, professor of history, Stanford University, Editor-The King Papers project

VOLUME VIII November 29, 1999 Testifying:

• Mr. William B. Hamblin, taxi-cab driver (1968), part-time security guard (currently) • Mr. James Joseph Isabel, taxi-cab and charter bus driver (1968), retired • Mr. Jerry William Ray, brother of James Earl Ray • Mr. Willie B. Richmond, captain, Memphis Police Department-Internal Affairs, retired • Mr. Douglas Valentine, author, The Phoenix Program • Mr. Carthel Weeden, Memphis Fire Department (1968), construction company owner (currently) • The Honorable Rev. Walter E. Fauntroy, SCLC Washington, DC Chapter Director (1968), later chair of the Congressional Subcommittee investigating the Assassination, pastor • Ms. April R. Ferguson, attorney, one of the post conviction defense attorney for James Earl Ray. • James E. Adams, taxi-cab driver • Yolanda King, actress/producer, eldest daughter of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. and Mrs. Coretta Scott King

VOLUME IX November 30, 1999 Testifying:

• Mr. Jack Kershaw, attorney, for James Earl Ray (’77) • Mr. Jack Terrel, Civilian Military Assistance, via

videotaped deposition • Mr. Louis Ward, security police and taxi-cab driver (1968), part-time roofer (current) • Mr. Raymond Kohlman, attorney • Mr. Earl Caldwell, reporter, the New York Times (1968) via videotaped deposition • Mr. Roy Grabow, husband of Glenda Grabow • Mr. John C. Smith, member, The Invaders • Mr. William Schaap, attorney, military and intelligence specialization, co-publisher “Covert Action Quarterly”

VOLUME X December 1, 1999 Testifying:

• Mr. Loyd Jowers, via deposition Nov. 2, 1994 • Mr. Mark Glankler, investigator, appointed by District Attorney General-December, 1993 • Mr. Dexter King, Chairman, President & CEO-The Martin Luther King, Jr. Center For Nonviolent Social Change, Inc., youngest son of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. and Mrs. Coretta Scott King

VOLUME XI December 2, 1999 Testifying:

• Rev. Samuel B. Kyles, pastor, Monumental Baptist Church, Memphis, TN, (1968-present) • Mr. Frank W. Young, Shelby County Criminal Clerk’s Office • Mr. Eli Arkin, Memphis Police Departmentinspection bureau (1968), currently-The Cottonwood Company • Ms. Rebecca A. Clark, ex-wife of Captain Earl Clark, Memphis Police Department (1968) • Mr. John Doe, via videotaped desposition of Novemebr 5, 1999

VOLUME XII December 6, 1999 Testifying:

• Ms. LaVada Addison, restaurant owner (1968), selfemployed, LaVada Estate Sales (current) • Mr. James Earl Ray, deposition of March 11-12, 1995 in the case of James Earl Ray versus Loyd Jowers

VOLUME XIII December 7, 1999 Testifying:

• Mr. James Earl Ray, deposition of March 11-12, 1995 in the case of James Earl Ray versus Loyd Jowers (continued) • Ms. Betty Jean Spates, waitress-Jim’s Grill, deposition of November 3, 1999

VOLUME XIV December 8, 1999 Closing Statements and verdict

1

THE CIRCUIT COURT OF SHELBY COUNTY, TENNESSEE

THIRTIETH JUDICIAL DISTRICT AT MEMPHIS

_____________________________________________

CORETTA SCOTT KING, MARTIN

LUTHER KING, III, BERNICE KING,

DEXTER SCOTT KING and YOLANDA KING,

Plaintiffs,

Vs. Case No. 97242-4 T.D.

LOYD JOWERS and OTHER UNKNOWN

CO-CONSPIRATORS,

Defendants.

_____________________________________________

BE IT REMEMBERED that the

above-captioned cause came on for Trial on

this, the 15th day of November, 1999, in the

above Court, before the Honorable James E.

Swearengen, Judge presiding, when and where

the following proceedings were had, to wit:

VOLUME I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI,

RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD & PARKER

COURT REPORTERS

22nd Floor, One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

(901) 529-1999

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2

- APPEARANCES -

For the Plaintiffs:

MR. WILLIAM PEPPER

Attorney at Law

575 Madison Avenue, Suite 1006

New York, New York 10022

(212) 605-0515

For the Defendant:

MR. LEWIS K. GARRISON, Sr.

Attorney at Law

100 North Main Street, Suite 1025

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

(901) 527-6445

For The Commercial Appeal:

MR. LUCIAN T. PERA

Attorney at Law

Armstrong, Allen, Prewitt, Gentry

Johnston & Holmes, PLLC

80 Monroe Avenue, Suite 700

Nashville, Tennessee 38103

(901) 524-4948

Reported by:

MS. MARGIE J. ROUTHEAUX

Registered Professional Reporter

Daniel, Dillinger, Dominski,

Richberger & Weatherford

2200 One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

3

P R O C E E D I N G S

THE COURT: Mr. Garrison, are

you all ready?

MR. GARRISON: Ready.

THE COURT: Let me see the

lawyers in chambers before we get started.

(Brief break taken.)

THE COURT: All right. Are we

ready to proceed?

MR. GARRISON: Yes, sir.

THE COURT: If there are any

members of the media, we're going to ask you

to excuse yourself until after the jury

selection process. All right, Mr. Sheriff,

you can get us some jurors.

THE COURT: All right,

Mr. Pepper, who are these additional people

with you?

DR. PEPPER: They're all with

us, part of our team.

THE COURT: Are they going to

participate in the trial?

DR. PEPPER: Only as assistants,

that's all.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

4

THE COURT: I normally introduce

those parties who are going to participate.

And if they are, I need their names.

DR. PEPPER: You want me to

write them down for you, Your Honor?

THE COURT: That has dual

purposes -- for my convenience and then, in

addition to that, once we have called their

names, we're in a position to ask the jurors

if they're familiar with their names.

DR. PEPPER: Sure.

(Brief break taken.)

MR. PERA: Your Honor, for many

years -- and I should first say, Your Honor,

that all I know about this situation is what

I've learned in the last 15 minutes. But as

I say, for the record, I do represent The

Commercial Appeal. I'm a little out of

breath. But my name is Lucian Pera. And

since at least 1984 when the Supreme Court

decided the Press Enterprise case -- Press

Enterprise versus Superior Court of

California. And the cite on that I can give

you which is 464 U.S. 501.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

5

In 1984 the Supreme Court has

made it clear, as has virtually every court

in the nation -- has addressed the issue that

there is a constitutional right on the part

of members of the public and, therefore,

members of the press to attend jury voir dire

proceedings in court. I would add, Your

Honor, that in Tennessee there have been at

least two cases on this point -- I believe

three.

The first one of which is State

versus Drake which is a 1985 case which

squarely follows the analysis in what are

called the quartet of cases of which Press

Enterprise is a part from the U.S. Supreme

Court. And that case requires that if there

is a closure of any part of a trial that

there must be under the constitution specific

findings by the Court on a motion by a party

that there will be prejudice if there's not a

closure and specifically how the closure is

tailored as narrowly as possible to meet the

compelling interest of preventing prejudice.

The Supreme Court of Tennessee

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

6

requires written findings. There have been

at least two other cases since then, Your

Honor. I don't -- I can't cite you the

precise name on this short of notice, but I

will remind the Court of one the Court may be

familiar with arising from this county. I

believe it was in front of a criminal court

judge across the street. And essentially

what happened is that there was -- it was a

rather horrible gang-related murder case.

In fact, it was one in which I

believe the victims were literally buried

alive. There were claims of misconduct

ongoing in the midst of the trial. In fact,

the Court itself was under 24-hour armed

guard at home and at the office -- at the

court. During the course of that trial, the

judge heard testimony from witnesses

obviously. And one of the witnesses who had

testified was to testify again.

The Court imposed a gag order

essentially closing the trial implicitly and

saying that the reporters might not print the

name of that witness who had already

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

7

testified in open court and who was to

further testify as a rebuttal witness. The

Court expressed very specific concerns about

safety, that the witness might flee, that the

trial might be jeopardized for that reason.

And the Court of Appeals -- excuse

me, I think it was the Court of Criminal

Appeals -- specifically and flatly and firmly

reversed that ruling and said that what goes

on in open court is open, and the

constitution requires that it be so, and

again reaffirming State vs. Drake relying on

Press Enterprise.

So, Your Honor, with that thought in

mind -- again, I've not been privy to the

discussions here about what the problem were

that were sought to be addressed, and I

apologize to the Court for not being prepared

in that respect. But I would urge the Court

to not close this hearing to members of media

including my client, The Commercial Appeal.

THE COURT: All right.

MR. PERA: And, Your Honor, I

might finally request that in compliance with

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

8

State versus Drake, whatever the Court's

decision there, that there be specific

findings of fact tailored to address the

issues under Press Enterprise.

THE COURT: All right. First of

all, I would like to refer you to Supreme

Court Rule 30, Media Guidelines, under

Section C(2) which reads as follows: "Jury

selection. Media coverage of jury selection

is prohibited."

MR. PERA: Your Honor, it's

my -- am I interrupting? I can look at the

rule, Your Honor, but it's my impression that

Rule 30 addresses television coverage and

similar media coverage. To the extent that

that rule, Your Honor, either says or is

interpreted to mean that voir dire may be

closed by a court without constitutional

foundation, the specifics which are very

clear -- I can cite them to the Court if I

can get my hands on State versus Drake.

If that rule says that or means that

or the Court interprets it to mean that, then

it is unconstitutional, Your Honor.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

9

THE COURT: Well, let me further

refer you to Section D, and that section

deals with limitations. And under 2 it says:

"Discretion of Presiding Judge." That's me.

"The presiding judge has the discretion to

refuse, limit, terminate or temporarily

suspend media coverage of an entire case or

portions thereof in order to 1.) Control the

conduct of proceedings before the Court.

2.) Maintain the quorum and prevent

distraction. 3.)" -- and this one I am

concerned with --"Guarantee the safety of any

party, witness or juror."

This case is such that I feel that

the jurors should be protected from public

scrutiny and that the public shall not be

aware of who they are. I don't want -- and

I'm going to assure them when we voir dire

them that they will remain anonymous. And

for that reason they will feel free to

participate in the trial process. That's my

ruling.

MR. PERA: Your Honor, may I be

heard on this point?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

10

THE COURT: No. I've ruled. I

have ruled.

MR. PERA: Okay. Your Honor,

meaning no disrespect, may I ask -- may I ask

a question?

THE COURT: Yes, sir.

MR. PERA: Has this Court

considered or has it been proposed to the

Court that the jurors remain anonymous and

therefore that proceedings be allowed to take

place in open court with, for example,

members of the public and/or media present

but nevertheless with the jurors remaining

anonymous? Has that been considered, Judge?

THE COURT: No, sir, because I

don't feel that that's a viable solution.

MR. PERA: May I ask a further

inquiry, Your Honor?

THE COURT: Yes, sir.

MR. PERA: Is it the Court's

ruling that the entire trial is going to be

held in secret?

THE COURT: No, sir. Once the

jury selection process is completed, then it

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

11

will be open to the media as prescribed by

court rules with cameras and with reporters

and all of that. This court is not excluding

the media from the trial proceeding, but it

is excluding them from the jury selection

process.

MR. PERA: Well, Your Honor,

again -- the Court knows me, and the Court

knows that I'm not inclined to argue with a

ruling once it's been made. But since I'm

getting into this so late, Your Honor, I have

to inquire further. Your Honor, if -- I'm

not at all sure I understand how this is

tailored narrowly under the guidelines of the

constitution.

I mean, for example, Your Honor,

if -- if the identities of the jurors is what

the Court is trying to protect, then -- and

not, for example, their answers to the

questions of one of the parties as to their

particular biases or lack of biases, it seems

to me that the Court might consider having

the jurors, as has been done across the

country, I think the Court is probably aware

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

12

of this -- having the jurors remain anonymous

and have the parties to the case and the

Court refer to them in whatever way would do

so anonymously but, nevertheless, allow the

questioning that goes to, for example,

bias -- their views on particular subjects to

be explored in open court as the constitution

requires.

I would urge that upon the Court as

a remedy that has been used elsewhere. And

it would not trample on the First Amendment

but it would, nevertheless, meet the Court's

concerns.

THE COURT: I'm going to deny

your request.

MR. PERA: Your Honor, when --

you're ruling then that until voir dire is

complete and the jury is sworn that this

hearing is closed both to members of the

press and the public?

THE COURT: I'm not excluding

the public, no, sir.

MR. PERA: So I can sit here for

example?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

13

THE COURT: You may, yes, sir.

But if you do, then you would be under a gag

order. As an officer of the Court you could

sit, yes, sir.

MR. PERA: But another member of

the public could be present and not be under

some sort of gag order?

THE COURT: I'm going to exclude

all members of the public, as a matter of

fact, during the jury selection process. I'm

not going to let reporters come in here and

say, at this time I'm not a reporter, I'm

just a member of John Q. Public.

MR. PERA: Okay, Your Honor. I

just wanted to make sure I understand your

ruling then. The hearing is closed to

members of the press and the public until the

jury is sworn.

THE COURT: And the public. And

the public, yes, sir.

MR. PERA: May I -- I assume

that what has transpired here so far, I'm

under no gag order; is that correct, Your

Honor? Because I may well be instructed by

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

14

my client to pursue appellate relief.

THE COURT: You are free to do

that.

MR. PERA: Okay. I just want to

make sure that we understand each other.

Thank you. Appreciate it, Your Honor.

MR. GARRISON: In the Court's

ruling I think Your Honor did the proper

thing.

(Brief break taken.)

(By Order of the Court, the Jury

Selection portion of the trial was not

transcribed.)

* * *

MR. PERA: I would like to apply

for permission to appeal under Tennessee Rule

of Appellant Procedure 9 from the Court's

earlier ruling.

THE COURT: Oh, yes. Of course.

MR. PERA: Thank you, Your

Honor. I assumed so. Your Honor, may I

present an order on that either this

afternoon or in the morning?

THE COURT: You may.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

15

MR. PERA: Thank you, Your

Honor.

(Lunch Recess.)

(Jury Selection resumed.)

THE COURT: All right. Ladies

and Gentlemen, we have completed our

process. We have 12 jurors now and two are

alternates. So the rest of you I'm going to

excuse and thank you for your patience, and

you can report to the main jury room tomorrow

at 9:30.

All right. Now that we have

selected or jurors and alternates, we would

ask to you please stand and take the official

oath as jurors in the case.

THE CLERK: Ladies and

Gentlemen, please raise your right hand.

(Whereupon the jury was sworn

in.)

THE CLERK: Okay. Please be

seated.

THE COURT: All right. Normally

at this stage we would begin our trial which

would be the rendering of an opening

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

16

statement by the lawyers. That is they would

tell you what they expect the proof to be as

it develops in the case, and then we would

start to hear the witnesses in the case. But

because of the hour, I'm going to excuse you

and ask you to be here tomorrow at 9:45 so

that we can get started promptly at 10

o'clock, reminding you that you should not

speak with the lawyers or the witnesses or

anyone else involved in the case and that you

should have no contact with the media.

I think -- I'll have some additional

instructions for you tomorrow before we start

to hear the proof. You should not go back to

the main jury room for any reason. You come

directly here from now on which means that

you don't report at the regular 9:30 thing

over there. Just come right here. Mr. James

will show you our jury facility back here,

and that's where you should congregate until

you come out as a group.

We would ask you -- sometimes the

jurors would sit out in the hall and do

things of that sort before the trial begins

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

17

in a normal case. But because of the nature

of this one and because we don't want you to

be exposed to the media, we would ask you to

please not congregate in the hallways out

there. If there are smokers in the crowd,

then during our breaks, you can feel free to

go down and do your smoking or whatever else

just as long as you don't have any contact

with the media.

If we -- if for any reason we need

to take a comfort break on your behalf, we're

very considerate, we'll do that. We want

this to be a pleasant experience for you.

But it's a serious matter, and let's not

forget that. All right.

(Court adjourned until 11/16/99

at 10:00 a.m.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

18

IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF SHELBY COUNTY,

TENNESSEE FOR THE THIRTIETH JUDICIAL

DISTRICT AT MEMPHIS

_______________________________________________

CORETTA SCOTT KING, et al,

Plaintiffs,

Vs. Case No. 97242

LOYD JOWERS, et al,

Defendants.

_______________________________________________

PROCEEDINGS

November 16th, 1999

VOLUME II

_______________________________________________

Before the Honorable James E. Swearengen,

Division 4, judge presiding.

_______________________________________________

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI,

RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

COURT REPORTERS

Suite 2200, One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

(901) 529-1999

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

19

- APPEARANCES -

For the Plaintiff: DR. WILLIAM PEPPER

Attorney at Law

New York City, New York

For the Defendant:

MR. LEWIS GARRISON

Attorney at Law

Memphis, Tennessee

Court Reported by:

MR. BRIAN F. DOMINSKI

Certificate of Merit

Registered Professional

Reporter

Daniel, Dillinger,

Dominski, Richberger &

Weatherford

22nd Floor

One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

20

- INDEX -

WITNESS: PAGE/LINE NUMBER

CORETTA KING

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:........................ 53 22

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:...................... 70 15

COBEY SMITH

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:........................ 75 10

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:...................... 96 16

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:........................ 101 4

CHARLES CABBAGE

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:........................ 102 10

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:..................... 121 7

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 127 18

JOHN McFERREN

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 132 5

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:..................... 155 10

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 159 9

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

21

NATHAN WHITLOCK

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 160 9

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:..................... 184 4

THOMAS SMITH

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 185 14

CHARLES HURLEY

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 192 15

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

22

PROCEEDINGS

(November 16th, 1999, 10:15 a.m.)

MR. PERA: Your Honor, good

morning. I have a couple preliminary matters

related to the matter you have on trial.

May I address the Court this

morning?

THE COURT: Let me get my orders

first.

MR. PERA: Okay. I thought

that was done, Your Honor. That's why I

approached.

THE COURT: Any additional

orders?

Okay. Go ahead, Mr. Pera.

MR. PERA: As you know, I'm

Lucian Pera. I represent the Commercial

Appeal. First, your Honor, I have an order

on yesterday's proceedings as to our motion

for access -- I have served this on counsel

for the parties -- that both grants -- both

denies my motion for access, grants our

status as an intervenor for our limited

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

23

purpose and grants the Rule 9 motion that you

orally granted yesterday.

THE COURT: All right.

MR. PERA: Does that meet with

your approval, your Honor?

There are two other matters, your

Honor, I want to present. One is a motion we

filed this morning.

As I understand it, although, of

course, I wasn't here and my client wasn't in

the courtroom, voir dire has been completed.

We have moved -- filed a motion with

the Court, I'm not sure if the Court has

received it yet, for access -- immediate

access as soon as practicable to the

transcript of voir dire proceedings. We have

filed a motion and would ask the Court to

grant us immediate access to the transcript

of the voir dire proceedings held in this

case.

THE COURT: Denied.

MR. PERA: Denied?

THE COURT: Uh-huh.

MR. PERA: May I, Your Honor --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

24

I'll obviously give a moment to counsel. I'm

anticipating one of two possible results.

I've actually prepared an order. Since I

know my client may be interested in an

appeal, I will share this with Mr. Pepper and

Mr. Garrison.

There is one other matter, Your

Honor. That is my partner Ms. Leizure is in

a better position to address it than I. We

know the Court has granted access to the

trial to the broadcast media, but under Rule

30 we would also, as the Court knows, do use

still photographers and would request and

have filed a motion yesterday afternoon by

access by one of our still photographers to

the courtroom.

If the Court needs to hear that

addressed from a legal point of view under

Rule 30, my partner, Ms. Leizure, can address

that.

THE COURT: As for still

photography, I'll have to refer to the rule,

which does allow it, but it is limited.

MS. LEIZURE: Your Honor, I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

25

believe the provisions are that you can limit

it to two still photographers.

THE COURT: Who are you?

MS. LEIZURE: I'm sorry, Your

Honor. I'm Kathy Leizure. I'm Mr. Pera's

partner. I represent the Commercial Appeal.

THE COURT: Kathy who?

MS. LEIZURE: I'm Kathy

Leizure. I believe the provision is, your

Honor, you can limit it to two still

photographers who are using no more than two

cameras each.

THE COURT: I intend to abide by

the rule.

MS. LEIZURE: Okay, Your Honor.

THE COURT: It says if there are

more than two, if we're going to have still

photography in the courtroom, you'll have to

work it out among yourselves. If they can't

work it out among themselves, then I'm going

to disallow all of it.

MS. LEIZURE: I understand, Your

Honor. There is a provision in here for

pooling arrangements, which I would be happy

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

26

to try to work out if I know, you know, what

other media have been granted access pursuant

to this rule for still photography purposes.

THE COURT: I intend to abide by

the rules. It is for that same reason that I

disallowed the presence of media during the

jury selection.

All right. Assuming that there are

no others who want to have still

photographers in the room, I'll allow yours,

but if it comes to a point where there are

more than the rule allows, if you can work it

out among yourselves, I'll do that. If not,

as I said, I'm going to disallow all of them,

because I'm not going to become involved in a

dispute over who can and who cannot.

MS. LEISURE: I understand, Your

Honor. I understand. So I will advise my

client that they can bring the still

photographer in within the provisions, the

criteria and guidelines of the rules.

THE COURT: The other thing is

that I have instructed all of them that they

are not to photograph my jury.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

27

MS. LEIZURE: That's right.

That's certainly a provision that is in the

rule. That's understood.

THE COURT: Yes.

MR. PEPPER: May I be heard,

Your Honor?

MR. PERA: I've provided this

order --

THE COURT: Just a moment. Go

ahead, Mr. Pepper.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you, Your

Honor. Your Honor, the family has its own

still photographer who would like to be

present in the courtroom and will abide by

all of the rules. It is Mr. Benedict

Fernandez, who for nearly forty years has

followed the history of Dr. King's work and

these proceedings.

THE COURT: All right. Those

two, then.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you, Your

Honor.

MR. PERA: Mr. Pepper, is this

order okay.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

28

MR. PEPPER: Yes.

MR. PERA: Your Honor, if I

could pass the order for immediate access to

is the transcript. Mr. Garrison and

Mr. Pepper have approved that order, although

I haven't actually signed that original.

Thank you, your Honor. I appreciate

you hearing us.

THE COURT: Yes. Mr. Garrison,

are you ready?

MR. GARRISON: Yes, Your Honor.

THE COURT: Mr. Pepper?

MR. PEPPER: Yes.

THE COURT: Bring the jury out,

Mr. Sheriff.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: Good morning, ladies

and gentlemen. Glad to see that everybody

made it this morning. Yesterday I

inadvertently omitted one of the Court

personnel. I should have introduced him. I

have to constantly remind him that I'm

elected by the residents of Shelby County and

that he is not my boss. It is my court

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

29

clerk, Mr. Brian Bailey over here. I think I

introduced everybody else.

Before we begin the trial, I'm going

to give you some preliminary facts that you

can refer to during the course of this

trial. Before the trial begins, I'm going to

give you some instructions to help you

understand how the case will proceed, what

your duties many be, and how you should

conduct yourselves during the trial.

When I have completed these

instructions, the attorneys will make their

opening statements. These statements will be

brief outlines of what the attorneys expect

to be evidence.

After the opening statements, you

will hear the evidence. The evidence

generally consists of the numbered exhibits

and testimony of witnesses. The plaintiffs

will present evidence first. The defendant

will then be given the opportunity to present

evidence.

Normally the plaintiff presents all

of the plaintiff's evidence before the other

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

30

parties present any evidence. Exceptions are

sometimes made out of this usually to

accommodate a witness.

The witnesses will testify in

response to questions from the attorneys.

Witnesses are first asked questions by the

party who calls the witness to testify, and

then other parties are permitted to

cross-examine the witness.

Although evidence is preserved my

asking questions, the questions themselves

are not evidence. Any insinuation contained

in a question is not evidence. You should

consider a question only as it gives meaning

to the witness' answer.

Evidence may be presented by

deposition. A deposition is testimony taken

under oath before the trial and preserved in

writing or sometimes it will be videotaped.

During the trial objections may be

made to the evidence or trial procedures. I

may sustain objections to questions asked

without permitting the witness to answer or I

may instruct you to disregard an answer that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

31

has been given.

In deciding this case you may not

draw an inference from an unanswered

question, and you may not consider testimony

that you are instructed to disregard.

Any arguments about objection or

motions are usually required to be made by

the attorneys out of the hearing of the

jury. Information may be excluded because it

is not legally admissible. Excluded

information cannot be considered in reaching

your decision.

A ruling that is made on an

objection or motion will be based solely upon

the law. You must not infer from a ruling

that I hold any view or opinion for or

against any parties to this lawsuit.

When all of the evidence has been

presented to you, the attorneys will make

their closing arguments. The attorneys will

point out to you what they contend the

evidence has shown, what inferences you

should draw from the evidence and what

conclusions you should reach as your

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

32

verdict.

The plaintiff will make the first

argument and will be followed by the

defendant. Plaintiff will then respond to

the defendant's arguments. Unless you are

otherwise instructed, statements made by the

attorneys are not evidence. Those statements

are made only to help you understand the

evidence and apply the law to the evidence.

You should ignore any statement that is not

supported by the evidence.

After the arguments are made, I will

instruct you on the rulings of law that apply

to the case. It is your function as jurors

to determine what facts -- what the facts are

and apply the rules of law that I have given

you to the facts that you have found.

You will determine the facts from

all of the evidence. You are the sole and

exclusive judges of the facts. On the other

hand, you are required to accept the rules of

law that I give you, whether you agree with

them or not.

As the sole judge of the facts, you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

33

must determine which of the witness'

testimony you accept, what weight you attach

to it and what inferences you will draw from

it. The law does not, however, require you

to accept all of the evidence in deciding

what evidence you will accept.

You must make your own evaluation of

the testimony given by each of the witnesses

and determine the weight you will give to

that testimony. You must decide which

witnesses you believe and how important you

think their testimony is. You are not

required to accept or reject everything a

witness says. You are free to believe all,

none or part of any person's testimony.

In deciding which testimony you

believe, you should rely on your own common

sense and every-day experiences. There is no

fixed set of rules to use in deciding whether

you believe a witness, but it may help you to

think of the following questions: Was the

witness able to see, hear or be aware of the

things about which the witness testifies?

How well was the witness able to recall and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

34

describe those things? How long was the

witness watching or listening? Was the

witness distracted in any way? Did the

witness have a good memory?

How did the witness look and act

while testifying? Was the witness making an

honest effort to tell the truth or did the

witness evade questions? Did the witness

have an interest in the outcome of the case?

Did the witness have any motive,

bias or prejudice that would influence the

witness' testimony? How reasonable was the

witness' testimony when you consider all of

the evidence in the case?

There are certain rules that would

apply concerning your conduct during the

trial and during recesses that you should

keep in mind. First, do not conduct your own

investigation into the case, although you may

be tempted do so.

For example, do not visit the scene

of an incident, read any books or articles

concerning any issue in the case or consult

any other source of information. If you were

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

35

to do that, you would be getting information

that is not evidence. You must decide the

case only on the evidence and law presented

to you during the trial.

Any juror who receives any

information about the case other than that

presented at the trial must notify the Court

immediately. Do not discuss the case either

among yourselves or with anyone else during

the trial.

You must keep an open mind until you

have heard all the evidence, the attorneys'

closing arguments and my final instructions

concerning the law. Any discussion before

the conclusion of the case would be premature

and improper.

Do not permit any other person to

discuss the case in your presence. If anyone

does attempt to do so, report that fact to

the Court immediately without discussing the

incident with any of the other jurors. Do

not speak to any of the attorneys, parties or

witnesses in the case even for the limited

purpose of saying good morning. They are

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

36

also instructed not to talk to you. In no

other way can all of the parties feel assured

of your absolute impartiality.

All right. There are a couple of

additional comments I would like to make. I

know that when you are over in the big room,

the jury commissioner probably tells you

don't ever leave anything lying around. I

just want you to know that we have not had

any unhappy experiences, that your personal

affects are considered to be safe in the jury

room.

So if you have sweaters or coats or

lunches or whatever else, then you can feel

pretty safe leaving them back there while you

are here or while you are gone to lunch.

Also, if we need to take a comfort

break, let us know and we'll be glad to

accommodate you. We want to make this a

pleasant experience for everyone.

We would ask you to be on time

whenever we are supposed to congregate. We'd

hate to have to be waiting on someone who is

disrespectful of the others and for some

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

37

reason couldn't make it on time.

Finally, I know that sometimes,

usually after lunch, but any time of day you

can become weary and just can't keep your

eyes open. So I am going to designate each

of you and authorize you to nudge your

neighbor if you catch them dozing on us.

All right. As I promised, the

attorneys will give their opening statements,

that is, they will tell you what they expect

the proof to be in this case. After they

have done that, we will begin to hear the

proof.

As I told you, this is a case on

conspiracy. Conspiracy I guess in general

terms would mean carrying out a design or

plan where two or more have agreed to commit

an act to do injury or damage. And the

planning, of course, is not enough. They

have to, in addition to the planning, do an

act pursuant to that plan in order to be a

co-conspirator.

All right. The plaintiff will

begin. Then after the defendant has given

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

38

their opening statement, we will start to

hear the proof in the case.

Mr. Pepper.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you, Your

Honor.

Good morning, ladies and gentlemen

of the jury. On the 3rd of April, 1968,

loving husband, father of four young children

kissed his family goodbye and left for

Memphis, Tennessee. He would never return.

They would never see him alive again.

On the 4th of April, 1968,

approximately one minute past six in the

evening as he stood on a balcony overlooking

a parking area of the Lorraine Motel, he was

felled by a single bullet, never regained

consciousness and died shortly thereafter.

That, ladies and gentlemen, is the

beginning of this story. The plaintiff in

this case, the victim, was a husband and a

father, but he also was a prophetic figure in

American history. He had been a civil rights

leader as a young man after school and in his

early pastor's years, but he moved beyond

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

39

that calling, beyond that calling on behalf

of the poor in the southern part of this

country, in this area of this country, to

become an international figure concerned with

the plight of poor people, economic injustice

and with the issues of peace and war.

So as he grew in his leadership and

his calling, he was awarded the Nobel Peace

Prize. With that award he became truly an

international figure, not a regional pastor

fighting for justice on behalf of his

people. He then turned his attention to the

plight of poor people and the effect of war.

He came out strongly during the last

year of his life to oppose the war in Vietnam

because he saw it destroying an ancient

culture and civilization that had so much in

common with the plight of black people and

the poor everywhere in the world. So he

opposed that war.

He also turned his attention to the

plight of poor people, the growing numbers of

poor in the United States, and had put

together a poor people's campaign that was to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

40

descend on Washington D.C. in the spring of

1968, the very spring in which he was

assassinated. That March an encampment did

come off but without its leader. As such, it

is history now that it did not have the

impact that it might have had on the Congress

of the United States. The victim was, of

course, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr..

The defendant in this case, Mr. Loyd

Jowers, who owned Jim's Grill, which was at

the ground floor of a rooming house on South

Main Street in Memphis at the time. It no

longer exists, but the building is still

there. Your Honor has quite correctly

advised you not to go near the scene of this

crime because it has changed so much over the

years. It would only be very confusing for

you. That is the reason for that

instruction.

At that time and now that building

backed onto an area, like a vacant lot area

or a backyard. That backyard was covered

with brush and bushes, and beyond it was the

Lorraine Motel and the balcony on which

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

41

Martin Luther King stood when he was

assassinated. The defendant managed and

owned that grill, and the plaintiffs will

attempt to prove that the wrongful acts and

conduct of this defendant led to the death of

Martin Luther King from behind his very

premises, from the bushes, the brush in that

area.

Now, by way of disclosure to you,

counsel for both parties have agreed not to

conduct any interviews with the media, not to

talk to the press at all, during the course

of this trial. The Court has so instructed

you with respect to that.

We think that is a most important

instruction, and, in addition, plaintiffs

would hope that you would think carefully

about the issues of this case and the facts

that are presented and the evidence that

comes before you and not considering what is

on television or radio or in the newspapers

regarding this case.

We would ask you please consider

staying away from any coverage of that sort

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

42

and make your decision solely on what you

hear in this courtroom. It is most

important.

Also by way of disclosure I have the

obligation to tell you that I was a friend

and a colleague of the victim in this case

during only the last year of his life. Years

later I began to look into the facts of this

case and ultimately became convinced that the

man accused of the crime was not guilty and

undertook to represent him and was his lawyer

for the last ten years of his life.

He died in prison, never having a

trial on the evidence in the case. And the

plaintiff family decided that this man also

was innocent of the crime and decided to come

out and support a trial for him a few years

before he died.

Now, the Court has properly

instructed you with respect to the nature of

the evidence. There will be mostly live

witnesses, but there will also be some

deposition evidence that you will hear, some

affidavits, some public statements, and the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

43

Court will advise you as to the range of

voracity you should put on any evidence that

is admitted in this Court. But it will not

all be live testimony, although indeed most

of it will.

With respect to the plaintiff's

proof, it is -- the case will be divided into

a variety of sections. It is important to us

that you consider those sections in the order

as it appears. There will be a general

introductory background area of the case that

will familiarize yourself with what led up to

this wrongful death so that will be hopefully

as clear to you as can be.

There will then be evidence laid

before you that will indicate that in fact

the fatal bullet was fired from the brush

area behind the rooming house, from a row of

bushes that were very tall and thick where a

sniper lay in wait and fired the shot. So

that section will deal with the bushes.

There will be a section of proof

that will deal with the rifle that is in

evidence that is alleged to have caused the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

44

death of Dr. King. And the proof that the

plaintiffs will put forward will demonstrate

to you that in fact the rifle in evidence is

not the murder weapon and that the murder

weapon was disposed of in another way.

Plaintiffs will advance proof that

there were a number of other people

involved. As Your Honor has correctly told

you, of course a conspiracy involves more

than one. Whilst this case is focusing in a

civil court on Mr. Jowers as the defendant,

there were other people involved. And some

of those individuals will be developed in

evidence.

In particular one individual will be

developed in evidence who was critical to the

coordination of a lot of these activities and

who is beyond the reach of this Court,

although will be invited, has been invited,

and will be invited to attend, but was a part

of this conspiracy, this collaboration with

Mr. Jowers.

Now, defendants have in their

answer, their amended answer, indicated that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

45

if liability results, and counsel has

mentioned that yesterday, if liability

results, attaches to his client, that it

should also attach to other agencies and

individuals.

Because that door is open,

plaintiffs will advance evidence of the

extent and the scope of this conspiracy so

that you understand the umbrella under which

the defendant was operating, so it is clear

to you the kind of total picture in which he

found himself as he carried out his wrongful

acts which led to this death.

One indication of this conspiracy,

why we are here thirty-one years later in

this courtroom in Memphis, Tennessee, is the

suppression of the truth, the cover-up that

has lasted for so long and the effects of

that cover-up in terms of people learning the

truth and courts, such as this Court, being

able to entertain proceedings designed to

unearth that truth.

This cover-up itself and that

section of the case would show you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

46

indications of the wrong and will relate

directly to the wrong itself that we are

proving here and alleging here.

Now, because these witnesses will

come from various parts of the country and

various parts of the world, I must say, we've

had to adjust to various schedules of

people. So to some extent the evidence you

hear up there may be disjointed. But what I

ask you to consider is that each of the

witnesses who testify with respect to facts

will be putting forward to you a particular

piece of this puzzle. And they are being

called only for -- he or she will be called

only for that particular piece. So you must

discern what that is in each instance.

Yes, there will be an introductory

statement so that you get to know the witness

and who the witness is, get a feeling for

whether he or she is credible. But beyond

that there will be a piece of information.

It would be very useful in our view

for you, if you could, to take notes in the

course of these proceedings. I know the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

47

State I understand does not provide you with

note paper or pads in this jurisdiction. But

if you could provide yourselves with them

just to make notes of particular facts that

you think are relevant that a witness has

testified to or an exhibit that you might

want to look at further or later on during

deliberations, that would be very helpful to

you when you begin to refresh your own

recollections, because there will be a lot of

information coming out.

There will be a great deal of

information coming out from a number of

witnesses. You may very well expect to

forget some of it unless you have noted it

down so you understand what they said. I

urge you to consider using that, to use some

mechanical way of recalling what has

happened. I think that's basically it.

I think plaintiffs believe that as a

result of the evidence you will hear in this

courtroom, that finally the truth will emerge

in respect of the assassination of Martin

Luther King, Jr. He often said that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

48

truth-crushed earth will rise again. Well, I

think plaintiffs sincerely hope that the

truth will be resurrected in this courtroom.

And that as a result of the truth being

resurrected in this courtroom, the events,

those horrible events of April 4th, 1968,

will be unearthed and seen and understood.

Ladies and gentlemen, prepare

yourselves for the resurrection of truth with

respect to that horrible day, April 4, 1968.

And I suggest to you that some of the

evidence you hear may go to the essence of

this Republic and may in fact shake some of

the foundations of this Republic. So

important is this case, so important is the

evidence, please consider it carefully and

well.

We seek a verdict of liability

against the defendant because he played a

critical role in these events. But it goes

well beyond him. And we're prepared to

acknowledge and to establish that.

Thank you.

THE COURT: Mr. Garrison.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

49

MR. GARRISON: If Your Honor

please and Dr. Pepper and ladies and

gentlemen, as you know, I'm Lewis Garrison.

I represent Mr. Jowers, who is the defendant

in this case.

I'd like to say this: I started

forty years ago in this practice of law in

August, and on April the 6th, 1968, I was

about three hundred feet from this very spot

in my desk when Dr. King was assassinated.

Now, Dr. Pepper and I agree on

probably eighty percent of the things that he

is advocating and stating to you. There are

some areas that we do not agree upon. I'll

touch on those now.

Ladies and gentlemen, April 4th,

1968, this city was racially divided.

November 16, 1999, it is still racially

divided. I'm sorry to tell you, it is. It

is an error we need to work on, and I hope

this trial will bring out some things that

perhaps will have some bearing on that.

Mr. Jowers has been around the City

of Memphis a long time. He is a former

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

50

police officer. When this occurred in 1968,

he was operating a small restaurant called

Jim's Grill.

Now, you'll find that any part that

he -- he has conferred with Mr. Dexter King

and Ambassador Young and told them some

things that he knew and heard, but I think

you will find that he was a very small part,

if any -- if any -- in the assassination of

Dr. King. He was simply operating a little

restaurant down on South Main Street.

Anything that Mr. Jowers may have had to do

with this certainly was unknown to him.

He was never told that the target of

an assassination was Dr. King. Certainly his

feelings are that he was at sympathy with

Dr. King and certainly for the things that

Dr. King was seeking.

Certainly Ms. King and her family

have been made to suffer more than any family

should. There is no question about that.

They've had to go through more than a family

should have to go through. We're certainly

in sympathy with them and have always been,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

51

always have been behind Dr. King and the

things that he was seeking.

When I was growing up, not too far

from here, we had separate rest rooms,

separate water fountains, those type things,

separate schools. It doesn't seem like it

was very long ago. But after Dr. King came

along, those things came to some extent, but

we still take too much of our rights for

granted. It has not always been the way it

is now.

In this trial you will hear from

different persons that will bring forth

things that you probably never heard before.

For instance, there will be a police officer

that will testify here about the United

States government sending in agents just

before Dr. King's assassination. You'll hear

a lady here testify about a police officer

who was her husband who was very prejudiced

against people whose skin was not white.

You'll hear, ladies and gentlemen,

from a gentleman who will also tell you that

he had a chance to be with Mr. James Earl Ray

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

52

for some months before the assassination, and

he'll provide information to you as to what

Mr. Ray disclosed to him as to how he escaped

from the Missouri prison, who helped him, and

the purpose of it.

I think, ladies and gentlemen,

you'll find in this case that Mr. Jowers was

a very, very small cog in a big wheel, if he

was a party at all. He never knowingly did

anything that would have caused the death of

Dr. King or brought any hardship on Ms. King

or her family.

Now, this has been a long process.

I've been involved it seems like forever. It

has been many, many years. Dr. Pepper has

been involved in this three times as long as

I have. But this is the final chapter.

Whatever historians may write, your verdict

will be the final chapter in this case.

So in this case I think when you

hear all the testimony here and all the proof

that Dr. Pepper will offer and I'll offer,

I'm going to be able to stand here and ask

you not only if you find that Mr. Jowers had

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

53

anything to do with it, but there are others

who are much more responsible than he was who

knew what they were doing and who brought

about the commission of this hate crime.

That's what it was. And that others

are responsible and that they should be held

liable instead of Mr. Jowers. It will be an

interesting trial. I think that you will

certainly find it interesting, and I hope

that you do.

If you will listen attentively,

because this is a very important case in the

history of this country.

Thank you.

THE COURT: Mr. Pepper, call

your first witness, please.

MR. PEPPER: Plaintiffs call

Mrs. Coretta Scott King to the stand.

CORETTA SCOTT KING

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good morning, Mrs. King.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

54

A. Good morning.

Q. Thank you for being here. I realize

how stressful it is at the time, particularly

because of the gauntlet of the media out

there. We're grateful for your presence.

Could you just tell us by way of

background what was the purpose of Dr. King's

visit to Memphis, his involvement in Memphis

and his coming here in 1968.

A. Martin came to Memphis to support the

sanitation workers who were engaged in a

strike for better wages and working

conditions. He felt it was important to come

to support them because they were working

poor people.

Q. And how did the sanitation workers'

strike and his support for that fit into the

Poor People's March in Washington which had

been planned for later on, the spring?

A. He felt that it was important that he

give his support to them because they were a

part of what he was really struggling to get

the nation to understand, that people work

full-time jobs but in a sense for part-time

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

55

pay. Even people who were poor who worked

could not make a decent living. So they

would then be invited to join the

mobilization for the campaign which was to be

held in Washington.

Q. Right. And was this support -- his

support for the sanitation workers in Memphis

and the plans for the Poor People's March in

Washington to be covered by the umbrella of

non-violence at all times?

A. Absolutely. He felt that -- as you

know, his whole life was dedicated to

non-violent struggle. Any time there was

violence of any kind, it was very disturbing

to him, and he disavowed it completely and

whenever he had an opportunity to.

He dedicated his life to helping

people to understand the philosophy of

non-violence, which he lived it as a way of

life. And so when he came to Memphis --

I don't know, Counsel, should I

mention that he -- I don't want to get ahead

of myself, but when he came to Memphis the

first time and there was a march that he led

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

56

which his organization had very little to do

with planning, that broke out in violence.

It was very, very upsetting to him

because most of the marches, I would say all

of them, that he had led had always been

mobilized with the support of the National

Southern Christian Leadership Conference

staff. Therefore, they were aware of any

problems, any controversies that might exist,

conflicts between groups and among groups.

But he came that day from a trip,

got off the plane and went straight to the

head of the march. Of course, the march did

break out in violence. It was most

disturbing to him.

So when he -- when this happened, he

felt that it was very important for him to

return to Memphis to lead a peaceful,

non-violent march before he could go forth to

Washington. He had to demonstrate that a

non-violent march, a peaceful march, could

take place in Memphis because of the

criticisms that were being leveled at that

time.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

57

Q. So he returned to Memphis that last

time because of the violence that broke out

on the march of March 28th, and he was

determined, from what you are saying, to

restore the position of non-violence to the

movement?

A. Yes, that's correct.

Q. Did he attribute -- did he have any

idea why that march on March 28th turned

violent? Did he have any notion of what

caused that?

A. Well, I think he became aware that

there was a local -- well, he thought at the

time what was a local group of young people

who really precipitated the violence. The

feeling was that there were some forces

behind them, that they were not just persons

who decided that they would throw rocks and

break windows.

Q. Now, what was behind or underlay his

decision to come out against the war in

Vietnam and to take on such a public

political posture, if you will, which was

quite a different change for him?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

58

A. I must say that my husband had wanted

to speak out against the war in Vietnam for

many years before he actually did do so. He

always -- he understood the conflict that

existed in Vietnam from its inception. And

he realized that it was an unjust war in the

first place. Then it was being fought

against, you know, people of color who were

poor. And wars, of course, for him didn't

solve any social problems but created more

problems than they solved.

He felt that this particular war was

not -- we could not win. Of course, history

proved him right within a very short period

of time after he spoke out. As a matter of

fact, one year after he spoke out against the

war, he was vindicated in that the nation had

reversed itself and its policy toward that

war.

That was April 4th, 1968, when he

actually spoke out against the war in his

first public statement. But he said he had

to do it because his conscience -- he could

no longer live with his conscience without

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

59

taking a position. He felt that doing so,

perhaps he could help to mobilize other

public opinion in support of his position,

which was, again, against the war.

Q. Do you recall the reaction of other

civil rights leaders at that time when he

came out against the war?

A. Yes, I do. Civil rights leaders,

other opinion makers, all criticized him,

both black and white. It was certainly --

certainly he expected it, but he probably

didn't expect some of the people who

criticized him to do so publicly.

His way in the non-violent way was

to privately disagree and to go and talk to

persons which are having a disagreement, but

to be attacked publicly was very difficult

for him. He also knew that if he spoke out,

it would probably affect the support, the

financial support, for his organization, the

Southern Christian Leadership Conference.

And, of course, it did very

profoundly. He knew that before he took that

risk and that position. So it wasn't

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

60

surprising, but, nevertheless, it was

painful.

Q. Was there much discussion at the time

about him running for public office because

he was being pushed forward as a third-party

candidate with Dr. Benjamin Spock as an

alternative to Lyndon Johnson's being

returned to office at that time? What do you

recall about him moving in that direction of

more serious political activity?

A. Well, I was aware of the fact that

there was talk about his running for public

office. It was interesting because from what

I knew of him, I never thought that he would

run for public office. Just knowing the kind

of person he was, and because, you know,

politics is very important and necessary, but

he would be freer to make statements

according to his conscience if he didn't run

for public office, and because he was

Christian minister and because he took his

commitment so seriously, I felt that it would

have been difficult for him.

But at the same time I remember him

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

61

saying that because of the criticisms that he

had gotten as he had spoken out against the

war, the media had stopped carrying any of

his statements and they didn't understand --

no one was getting his message, because the

message wasn't being carried forth.

There were a number of critical

articles and some cover stories that were

very critical of him at that time. Time

magazine, for instance, did one in 1967 that

was extremely critical. He had been the Time

man of the year in 1964 after the Peace

Prize, and 1957 was the first time, so it

was, again, very painful for him not to be

able to get his message out.

So he said if I did run for office,

it would be one way of getting my message out

because I would have to be given equal time.

The interesting thing about my

husband, he always considered, you know,

every aspect of an issue, both the pros and

the cons. And then he would make his mind up

as to what he would do.

Q. Were there any comments that he made

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

62

the night before his departure to Memphis,

that last trip, any indications that he had

of potential danger or the seriousness of the

task that he faced in Memphis?

A. I don't remember specific comments in

that regard. But he had -- after he returned

from Memphis after the violence broke out,

which was like on a Friday evening, he went

back on a Tuesday -- he went back on --

Q. He arrived on a Wednesday, the 3rd.

A. -- on Wednesday morning. But in

between that time I was aware of how heavily

it weighed on him, the problem of -- this

whole problem of the sanitation workers'

conflict and what he could do to help by

getting his staff united. Because some of

the staff didn't feel he should go to Memphis

in the first place. He was very strongly in

favor of that.

So he came home late -- I guess it

was Tuesday evening he came in. There was

not time to talk. He got up very early

Wednesday morning to go to Memphis. He

always called me, you know, almost every

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

63

night when he was on trips, so he didn't say

whole lot about it, but I could tell that he

had a lot of anxiety and it was very heavily

weighing on his mind.

Q. Did he go through these times, and

particularly this last year, manifesting an

awareness that his life was in danger, that

he had taken a path of action now that might

have brought his life into danger?

A. Yes. I think he was aware of that

certainly. I might say he was aware from the

early days after Montgomery, Montgomery

forward, but I think as he got closer toward

this period of his life, he was even more

acutely aware.

Given the positions that he had

taken, he realized that, you know, he could

be killed at any time, but for him, his

commitment to what he believed and to a

higher authority was such that he didn't mind

giving his life for a cause that he believed

in.

He used to say that the end of life

is not to be happy but to do God's will, come

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

64

what may. So for him being happy was when he

could come out against the war against

Vietnam. He said to a colleague, and I heard

this on the telephone, I was the happiest man

in the world when I could come out personally

against this evil and immoral war, because I

came to a point where I felt that silence was

betrayal.

So that was -- I think that was his

position.

Q. Mrs. King, on March 10th, 1969, one

James Earl Ray entered a guilty plea and was

sentenced to ninety-nine years in prison for

the assassination of your husband. Mr. Ray

stayed in prison until he died. But he tried

continually to get a trial.

At one point the family decided to

support an effort for a trial for Mr. Ray.

Why did the family take that position that

late in the day at that point in time?

A. Well, as a matter of fact, it was

because he of new information that we had

received and largely because of the efforts

that you had put forth to investigate a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

65

number of these leads that had come out and

found that they were reliable enough.

When we looked at it and

investigated it, we felt then that we had to

take a position. For years we hoped that

somebody else would find out, find the

answers. We wanted to know the truth. But

the truth was elusive.

We wanted to go on with our lives.

We felt the only way we could do it was to

really take the position that we did take,

because the evidence pointed away from Mr.

Ray, not that he might have not had some

involvement but he was not the person we felt

that really actually killed him.

THE COURT: Just a moment. I

see this man aiming a camera at my jury. I

don't know that he has been told not to.

DEPUTY JAMES: I've instructed

him not to take it of the jury.

THE COURT: All right. Go

ahead.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) What was the general

reaction to the family as a result of that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

66

position? Were there animosity? Were there

attacks, lawsuits? What happened to the

family, yourself and the children and the

organization as a result of that position?

A. Well, there were a number of media

articles that were negative toward the

family. As a result of that -- there were

several really and over a period of months,

and as a result of it, we feel that there was

some -- it had affected some of the support

that we might have been able to receive for

the King Center.

Q. Financial support?

A. Financial support, yes.

Q. Contributions?

A. Yes.

Q. Is that similar to what happened to

SCLC back in 1967?

A. That's right.

Q. Mrs. King, why is the family bringing

this action now thirty -- almost thirty-one

years later against the defendant,

Mr. Jowers?

A. Well, it has only been recently that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

67

we realized the extent of Mr. Jowers'

involvement. So we felt that it was

important to bring it now. We're all getting

older, I'll say, and, of course, we wanted to

be able to get the truth, as much of it as we

can, out before it gets later.

I don't know how much longer any of

us will be around. That's not given. But

the fact is that my family, my children and

I -- I've always felt that somehow the truth

would be known, and I hoped that I would live

to see it.

And it is important I think for the

sake of healing for so many people, my

family, for other people, for the nation. I

think Martin Luther King, Jr., served this

nation. He was a servant. He gave his -- he

willingly gave his life if it was necessary.

It is important to know, actually not because

we feel a sense of revenge -- we never have.

We have no feeling of bitterness or hatred

toward anybody. But just the fact that if we

know the truth, we can be free, and we can go

on with our lives.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

68

Q. Mrs. King, is the family seeking a

large monetary award from Mr. Jowers as a

result of this action?

A. No, it is not about money. That's

not the issue. I think what we're concerned

about is the fact that certainly there is

some liability by Mr. Jowers, but we're

concerned about the truth, having the truth

coming out, and in a court of law so that it

can be documented for all. And we were

hoping that this would be one way of getting

to the truth.

MR. PEPPER: Mrs. King, thank

you very much.

MR. GARRISON: If we could

possibly take a short break before I ask my

questions.

THE COURT: Very well. We will

take a fifteen-minute recess.

(Jury out.)

(Short recess.)

THE COURT: Are you ready for

the jury?

MR. GARRISON: Yes, if Your

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

69

Honor please.

THE COURT: Bring the jury out.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: All right, ladies

and gentlemen. I would like to read to you

before we begin here the Court rules on

taking notes. You are permitted to take

notes during the trial. You may take notes

only of verbal testimony from witnesses,

including witnesses presented by deposition

or videotape.

You may not take notes during the

opening statements or closing arguments or

take notes of objections made to the

evidence. You may not take notes during

breaks or recesses. Notes may be made only

in open court while witnesses are

testifying. Your notes should not contain

personal reactions or comments but, rather,

should be limited to a brief factual summary

of testimony you think is important.

Please do not let your note-taking

distract you and cause you to miss what the

witness said or how the witness said it.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

pay. Even people who were poor who worked

could not make a decent living. So they

would then be invited to join the

mobilization for the campaign which was to be

held in Washington.

Q. Right. And was this support -- his

support for the sanitation workers in Memphis

and the plans for the Poor People's March in

Washington to be covered by the umbrella of

non-violence at all times?

A. Absolutely. He felt that -- as you

know, his whole life was dedicated to

non-violent struggle. Any time there was

violence of any kind, it was very disturbing

to him, and he disavowed it completely and

whenever he had an opportunity to.

He dedicated his life to helping

people to understand the philosophy of

non-violence, which he lived it as a way of

life. And so when he came to Memphis --

I don't know, Counsel, should I

mention that he -- I don't want to get ahead

of myself, but when he came to Memphis the

first time and there was a march that he led

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

56

which his organization had very little to do

with planning, that broke out in violence.

It was very, very upsetting to him

because most of the marches, I would say all

of them, that he had led had always been

mobilized with the support of the National

Southern Christian Leadership Conference

staff. Therefore, they were aware of any

problems, any controversies that might exist,

conflicts between groups and among groups.

But he came that day from a trip,

got off the plane and went straight to the

head of the march. Of course, the march did

break out in violence. It was most

disturbing to him.

So when he -- when this happened, he

felt that it was very important for him to

return to Memphis to lead a peaceful,

non-violent march before he could go forth to

Washington. He had to demonstrate that a

non-violent march, a peaceful march, could

take place in Memphis because of the

criticisms that were being leveled at that

time.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

57

Q. So he returned to Memphis that last

time because of the violence that broke out

on the march of March 28th, and he was

determined, from what you are saying, to

restore the position of non-violence to the

movement?

A. Yes, that's correct.

Q. Did he attribute -- did he have any

idea why that march on March 28th turned

violent? Did he have any notion of what

caused that?

A. Well, I think he became aware that

there was a local -- well, he thought at the

time what was a local group of young people

who really precipitated the violence. The

feeling was that there were some forces

behind them, that they were not just persons

who decided that they would throw rocks and

break windows.

Q. Now, what was behind or underlay his

decision to come out against the war in

Vietnam and to take on such a public

political posture, if you will, which was

quite a different change for him?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

58

A. I must say that my husband had wanted

to speak out against the war in Vietnam for

many years before he actually did do so. He

always -- he understood the conflict that

existed in Vietnam from its inception. And

he realized that it was an unjust war in the

first place. Then it was being fought

against, you know, people of color who were

poor. And wars, of course, for him didn't

solve any social problems but created more

problems than they solved.

He felt that this particular war was

not -- we could not win. Of course, history

proved him right within a very short period

of time after he spoke out. As a matter of

fact, one year after he spoke out against the

war, he was vindicated in that the nation had

reversed itself and its policy toward that

war.

That was April 4th, 1968, when he

actually spoke out against the war in his

first public statement. But he said he had

to do it because his conscience -- he could

no longer live with his conscience without

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

59

taking a position. He felt that doing so,

perhaps he could help to mobilize other

public opinion in support of his position,

which was, again, against the war.

Q. Do you recall the reaction of other

civil rights leaders at that time when he

came out against the war?

A. Yes, I do. Civil rights leaders,

other opinion makers, all criticized him,

both black and white. It was certainly --

certainly he expected it, but he probably

didn't expect some of the people who

criticized him to do so publicly.

His way in the non-violent way was

to privately disagree and to go and talk to

persons which are having a disagreement, but

to be attacked publicly was very difficult

for him. He also knew that if he spoke out,

it would probably affect the support, the

financial support, for his organization, the

Southern Christian Leadership Conference.

And, of course, it did very

profoundly. He knew that before he took that

risk and that position. So it wasn't

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

60

surprising, but, nevertheless, it was

painful.

Q. Was there much discussion at the time

about him running for public office because

he was being pushed forward as a third-party

candidate with Dr. Benjamin Spock as an

alternative to Lyndon Johnson's being

returned to office at that time? What do you

recall about him moving in that direction of

more serious political activity?

A. Well, I was aware of the fact that

there was talk about his running for public

office. It was interesting because from what

I knew of him, I never thought that he would

run for public office. Just knowing the kind

of person he was, and because, you know,

politics is very important and necessary, but

he would be freer to make statements

according to his conscience if he didn't run

for public office, and because he was

Christian minister and because he took his

commitment so seriously, I felt that it would

have been difficult for him.

But at the same time I remember him

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

61

saying that because of the criticisms that he

had gotten as he had spoken out against the

war, the media had stopped carrying any of

his statements and they didn't understand --

no one was getting his message, because the

message wasn't being carried forth.

There were a number of critical

articles and some cover stories that were

very critical of him at that time. Time

magazine, for instance, did one in 1967 that

was extremely critical. He had been the Time

man of the year in 1964 after the Peace

Prize, and 1957 was the first time, so it

was, again, very painful for him not to be

able to get his message out.

So he said if I did run for office,

it would be one way of getting my message out

because I would have to be given equal time.

The interesting thing about my

husband, he always considered, you know,

every aspect of an issue, both the pros and

the cons. And then he would make his mind up

as to what he would do.

Q. Were there any comments that he made

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

62

the night before his departure to Memphis,

that last trip, any indications that he had

of potential danger or the seriousness of the

task that he faced in Memphis?

A. I don't remember specific comments in

that regard. But he had -- after he returned

from Memphis after the violence broke out,

which was like on a Friday evening, he went

back on a Tuesday -- he went back on --

Q. He arrived on a Wednesday, the 3rd.

A. -- on Wednesday morning. But in

between that time I was aware of how heavily

it weighed on him, the problem of -- this

whole problem of the sanitation workers'

conflict and what he could do to help by

getting his staff united. Because some of

the staff didn't feel he should go to Memphis

in the first place. He was very strongly in

favor of that.

So he came home late -- I guess it

was Tuesday evening he came in. There was

not time to talk. He got up very early

Wednesday morning to go to Memphis. He

always called me, you know, almost every

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

63

night when he was on trips, so he didn't say

whole lot about it, but I could tell that he

had a lot of anxiety and it was very heavily

weighing on his mind.

Q. Did he go through these times, and

particularly this last year, manifesting an

awareness that his life was in danger, that

he had taken a path of action now that might

have brought his life into danger?

A. Yes. I think he was aware of that

certainly. I might say he was aware from the

early days after Montgomery, Montgomery

forward, but I think as he got closer toward

this period of his life, he was even more

acutely aware.

Given the positions that he had

taken, he realized that, you know, he could

be killed at any time, but for him, his

commitment to what he believed and to a

higher authority was such that he didn't mind

giving his life for a cause that he believed

in.

He used to say that the end of life

is not to be happy but to do God's will, come

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

64

what may. So for him being happy was when he

could come out against the war against

Vietnam. He said to a colleague, and I heard

this on the telephone, I was the happiest man

in the world when I could come out personally

against this evil and immoral war, because I

came to a point where I felt that silence was

betrayal.

So that was -- I think that was his

position.

Q. Mrs. King, on March 10th, 1969, one

James Earl Ray entered a guilty plea and was

sentenced to ninety-nine years in prison for

the assassination of your husband. Mr. Ray

stayed in prison until he died. But he tried

continually to get a trial.

At one point the family decided to

support an effort for a trial for Mr. Ray.

Why did the family take that position that

late in the day at that point in time?

A. Well, as a matter of fact, it was

because he of new information that we had

received and largely because of the efforts

that you had put forth to investigate a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

65

number of these leads that had come out and

found that they were reliable enough.

When we looked at it and

investigated it, we felt then that we had to

take a position. For years we hoped that

somebody else would find out, find the

answers. We wanted to know the truth. But

the truth was elusive.

We wanted to go on with our lives.

We felt the only way we could do it was to

really take the position that we did take,

because the evidence pointed away from Mr.

Ray, not that he might have not had some

involvement but he was not the person we felt

that really actually killed him.

THE COURT: Just a moment. I

see this man aiming a camera at my jury. I

don't know that he has been told not to.

DEPUTY JAMES: I've instructed

him not to take it of the jury.

THE COURT: All right. Go

ahead.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) What was the general

reaction to the family as a result of that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

66

position? Were there animosity? Were there

attacks, lawsuits? What happened to the

family, yourself and the children and the

organization as a result of that position?

A. Well, there were a number of media

articles that were negative toward the

family. As a result of that -- there were

several really and over a period of months,

and as a result of it, we feel that there was

some -- it had affected some of the support

that we might have been able to receive for

the King Center.

Q. Financial support?

A. Financial support, yes.

Q. Contributions?

A. Yes.

Q. Is that similar to what happened to

SCLC back in 1967?

A. That's right.

Q. Mrs. King, why is the family bringing

this action now thirty -- almost thirty-one

years later against the defendant,

Mr. Jowers?

A. Well, it has only been recently that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

67

we realized the extent of Mr. Jowers'

involvement. So we felt that it was

important to bring it now. We're all getting

older, I'll say, and, of course, we wanted to

be able to get the truth, as much of it as we

can, out before it gets later.

I don't know how much longer any of

us will be around. That's not given. But

the fact is that my family, my children and

I -- I've always felt that somehow the truth

would be known, and I hoped that I would live

to see it.

And it is important I think for the

sake of healing for so many people, my

family, for other people, for the nation. I

think Martin Luther King, Jr., served this

nation. He was a servant. He gave his -- he

willingly gave his life if it was necessary.

It is important to know, actually not because

we feel a sense of revenge -- we never have.

We have no feeling of bitterness or hatred

toward anybody. But just the fact that if we

know the truth, we can be free, and we can go

on with our lives.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

68

Q. Mrs. King, is the family seeking a

large monetary award from Mr. Jowers as a

result of this action?

A. No, it is not about money. That's

not the issue. I think what we're concerned

about is the fact that certainly there is

some liability by Mr. Jowers, but we're

concerned about the truth, having the truth

coming out, and in a court of law so that it

can be documented for all. And we were

hoping that this would be one way of getting

to the truth.

MR. PEPPER: Mrs. King, thank

you very much.

MR. GARRISON: If we could

possibly take a short break before I ask my

questions.

THE COURT: Very well. We will

take a fifteen-minute recess.

(Jury out.)

(Short recess.)

THE COURT: Are you ready for

the jury?

MR. GARRISON: Yes, if Your

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

69

Honor please.

THE COURT: Bring the jury out.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: All right, ladies

and gentlemen. I would like to read to you

before we begin here the Court rules on

taking notes. You are permitted to take

notes during the trial. You may take notes

only of verbal testimony from witnesses,

including witnesses presented by deposition

or videotape.

You may not take notes during the

opening statements or closing arguments or

take notes of objections made to the

evidence. You may not take notes during

breaks or recesses. Notes may be made only

in open court while witnesses are

testifying. Your notes should not contain

personal reactions or comments but, rather,

should be limited to a brief factual summary

of testimony you think is important.

Please do not let your note-taking

distract you and cause you to miss what the

witness said or how the witness said it.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

70

Remember that some testimony may not appear

to be important to you at the time. The same

testimony, however, may become important

later in the trial.

Your notes are not evidence. You

should not view your notes as authoritative

records or consider them as a transcript of

the testimony. Your notes may be incomplete

or may have certain errors and are not an

exact account of what was said by a witness.

All right. You may proceed,

Mr. Pepper.

Oh, would you like to cross-examine,

Mr. Garrison?

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good morning, Mrs. King.

A. Goods morning.

Q. Ms. King, you and I met before and

we've talked a few times. I've talked to

your sons several times.

Let me say this to you: I know it

isn't easy for you to be the mother of four

children, but they are all fine, honorable

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

71

sons and daughters, very fine, honorable

people and I know you are pleased with them.

I know Dr. King would be.

Let me ask you, Ms. King, you've

never been afforded the opportunity to come

into a court of law such as this and be able

to be a witness as a part of it, have you?

When Mr. Ray had a hearing, you were not a

party to that hearing, were you?

A. No.

Q. You never had an opportunity to come

into a court of law before this to have a

jury decide the issues in the case. Am I

correct, please, ma'am?

A. That's correct.

Q. Let me ask you, did Dr. King before

his assassination, sometime before he came to

Memphis, did he receive a lot of threats that

you are aware of that may be hearsay? Was he

aware of a lot of threats?

A. Well, the morning that he was to come

back to Memphis that second time, which was

the final time, his plane was delayed because

of threats that had come to him. I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

72

understand that -- well, of course, over the

years there had been threats on his life many

times.

Q. Do you recall, Ms. King, when Dr.

King would appear at a place such as Memphis

here who would plan his security? Do you

know who was in charge of that or how they

arranged for security for him? Did he have

someone in his group that was responsible for

it or did they rely on the local police

department? Do you know how that was done?

A. I really don't know how that was

handled except usually when he went into

cities, the people who -- when he went to

towns, the people locally, the committee

locally that invited him, would handle the

security.

Q. Let me ask you, Ms. King, when Dr.

King returned from Memphis after the march,

do you recall -- was there any particular

group or any particular person that insisted

he come back here a second time? Did he ever

mention to you anything about any particular

person or any group that insisted on him

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

73

coming back a second time?

A. I don't know about his coming back

specifically, but I know about his coming

initially. I think what he had said publicly

before he left was that he was planning to

come back. So I think there was that

understanding that he would be coming back.

How it came about I'm not sure.

Q. You mentioned earlier I believe that

he seemed to be agonizing over the fact that

he would return to Memphis. Was that because

of the threat or because of the conditions

here?

A. No, not because of the threats but

just because it was so important that he lead

a non-violent demonstration. Of course,

there was an injunction. He had to get past

the injunction as well. He took those -- his

responsibility very, very seriously, because

he knew that the nation and indeed the world

was watching. In his own conscience he

wanted to be clear that he was doing the

right thing.

Q. Now, Ms. King, you are aware of the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

74

fact that Mr. Jowers had met and conferred

with Mr. Dexter King, your son, on one

occasion, then again with Mr. Dexter King and

Ambassador Young on another occasion. You

have heard about that, I'm sure?

A. Yes, yes.

Q. Are you aware of the fact that

Mr. Jowers stated to them each time he met

with them that he was not aware of any of the

acts he did that would lead up to the

assassination of Dr. King, that whatever

acts -- there was no mention of that to him,

that he had no idea that whatever acts he may

have been called upon he had no idea would

lead to the assassination Dr. King? Are you

aware of that?

A. I'm not aware of the conversation as

much as I wasn't involved with it. So I

couldn't speak to the detail of that.

Q. I see.

MR. GARRISON: I believe that's

all. Thank you, Ms. King.

THE COURT: Any redirect?

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

75

Your Honor.

THE COURT: You may stand down,

Ms. King.

(Witness excused.)

MR. PEPPER: Plaintiffs call Dr.

Cobey Smith.

COBEY SMITH

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Dr. Smith.

A. Good afternoon.

Q. Thank you for coming here. Would you

state your full name and address for the

record, please.

A. Cobey Vernon Smith, 2240 Brown

Avenue, Memphis, Tennessee.

Q. And what is your occupation?

A. I'm an educator consultant.

Q. Were you a member of a group called

the Invaders back in 1968?

A. Yes.

Q. You were an active member of that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

76

group at the time of the assassination of

Martin Luther King?

A. Yes.

Q. At the time of the sanitation

workers' strike?

A. Yes.

Q. And when were the Invaders formed?

A. In 1967.

Q. Who formed that group?

A. I formed that group along with

Charles Cabbage and John Smith.

Q. What was the purpose of the

Invaders? What was their organizational

purpose?

A. The purpose was to provide an

organizational format for young people, for

people in the City of Memphis. We really

formed as a result of the Meredith march in

Mississippi, which is when I first met Dr.

King. Many of us who had gone down became

active in organizing and became proponents of

the black power movement. We saw ourselves

as agents for liberation of our people

throughout the country.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

77

I don't know whether people can

really remember this, but in 1966 and 1967 it

was extremely unsafe to walk the streets in

cities like Memphis and southern cities

across the country, cities all over. So we

saw ourselves as an organizing tool to make

people aware of the fact that we were a free

people with all the rights and privileges of

Americans, to operate and seek prosperity,

equality and all the other things that were

rightfully ours by law.

Q. So the Invaders were a local

community-organizing group?

A. That's right.

Q. How were the Invaders funded? How

were they financed?

A. Out of our own pocket. We received

no real funding. We received one grant for

the black organizing project, which is a

grant I wrote in 1967. We received some jobs

from the War on Poverty Commission.

Cab and I were hired as

thirty-dollar-a-week organizers in 1967, a

job from which we were fired because we had

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

78

affiliation with SNCC and other

organizations.

Q. Would you tell the jury what SNCC

stands for?

A. The Student Non-violent Coordinating

Committee.

Q. What was the Student Non-violent

Coordinating Committee?

A. It was a national organization which

spent -- which really developed out of the

civil rights movement which at its inception

provided the foot soldiers for the civil

rights movement, the young men and women who

went out and desegregated lunch counters,

students from all over the country, many from

Memphis, incidentally, who became the cannon

fodder for the movement, as a matter of

fact.

We would go out and do the

organizing work, go into the rural areas, go

into the cities, the colleges, the prisons,

everywhere there was a need really to let

people know the kinds of things that Dr. King

and others had talked about were realities

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

79

for us.

Q. Did you see yourself in a sense as

foot soldiers, community-based foot soldiers,

in that movement?

A. Well, you know, now that I'm a

gray-haired old man, I don't want to be vain

enough to say that. We really thought that

we were a chosen few on a mission. We really

saw ourselves as helping fulfill the American

dream.

We were idealists for the most

part. We were people born of desire to

change the concept in America from its

desegregated biased roots and its hatred for

African-Americans to people who understood

that we should enjoy the right to vote, the

right to speak freely, the right to come and

go as we please, to live where we wanted to,

to seek an education, all those little things

that people now seem to say we take for

granted.

Q. With this background and this history

and this organizational activity, was there a

time when you associated -- became associated

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

80

with Dr. King's activities in Memphis?

A. Oh, yes. Oh, yes.

Q. When was that?

A. When the sanitation workers started

their -- we did the basic street organizing,

you might say, for the events that led up to

the sanitation workers' strike. We went out

and got the -- we told grown men that they

had a right to petition government, to

question police, to do all kinds of things.

Then when the organization, the

AFSCME, which is the American Federation of

State, County, Municipal Employees, started

to organize its membership, many of its

leaders came to us and they accepted our

efforts to go out in the communities and gain

support for the kind of people who needed

this help.

When you say this to somebody, it

probably sounds -- I don't know how to really

describe it because this was a very dangerous

thing to do. You didn't have a right to go

and talk to the city government about

organizing its employees. That was against

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

81

the law. You did not have a right to

question a policeman if they stopped you and

talked to you or if they asked you a

question. And people were afraid.

We didn't have many lawyers, judges,

anything else, who would actually stand up to

the kind of abuse that we were subjected to

here in Memphis.

So when the sanitation workers got

together and decided they would organize,

they offered a list of things that they

wanted, to be recognized as a union, to

receive the same pay as white employees,

other kinds of things, that seem so mundane

to us now. That platform that they used, we

had been using it for a few years since a man

who is now a judge ran for public works

commissioner.

So we were involved in this process

actively trying to get it together. And that

year when we became -- when the union kind of

put itself together, the real hell broke

loose in Memphis. The mayor decided that it

would never be recognized. A group of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

82

ministers got together and decided that they

would work in support of the union.

We worked hard to get them to come

in. And because we were having such great

difficulty with the white community resisting

this whole effort, with many people in the

black community being threatened and who were

afraid, the leadership of the strike itself

decided to invite Dr. King here.

Dr. King was not only the greatest

leader that we've ever had, he was a person

who by his bearing and presence brought a

kind of calm to the entire community, to

those who were opposed to us. We understood

because of our youth and our exuberance that

sometimes we were not perceived as being

ready to lead.

There were people who were afraid of

us because we would stop and ask questions.

Well -- or because we would even resist the

kinds of pushing around that we received.

Several days after the start of the strike

itself, the sanitation workers had a march

down Main Street, and the police took their

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

83

cars and pushed them into the sidewalk.

Q. Do you know -- excuse me for

interrupting. Do you know the date of that

particular march?

A. No, I don't remember the exact date.

But it was --

Q. Was it in February of 1967 or March

of 1967?

A. It would have been in February.

Q. Early on in the strike?

A. Yes. Very early in the strike. A

number of sanitation workers were injured.

Before that happened, two men were killed,

were crushed, in a garbage truck, one that

automatically closed down and collected the

garbage. That set off a fierce to

resistance, a fierce resistance.

When they had to march down Main

Street and the police attacked them, dogs,

clubs, guns, beat the hell out of a lot of

them, we really decided to ask for a more

militant stance from the union itself.

This probably sounds pretty mundane,

but prior to that time the religious leaders

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

84

did not want to approach this as if it were a

regular strike. Many of us had grown up in

the -- with roots to the labor movement, just

as we had to the civil rights movement.

We believed, for example, that

ASCFME should operate its strike just like

the AFL-CIO or the Teamsters or anybody else

and that we should stop the flow of trucks

that were being driven by strike breakers,

that we should end this garbage collection

that was designed to break the strike. Well,

we found ourselves in a greatly divided

strike effort.

Many of the ministers and some of

the black leaders in town were much more

interested in compromising and going along

with the edicts of the city administration.

We did not want to see that occur.

We wanted a full and legitimate

recognition of the union. We wanted to make

sure that the rights of these employees were

protected. Most of these men were from rural

West Tennessee, had been driven off the farm,

had come in from places like Fayette County

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

85

where they had been driven off the land in

what we call the Tent City.

Q. The founder of Tent City will be

testifying in these proceedings. So we can

move from that. But let me move you onto the

association with Dr. King. What was the

relationship that emerged between the

Invaders and SCLC, Dr. King's organization

here in Memphis, related to the sanitation

workers' strike?

A. Originally when Dr. King's people got

here there was a kind of an uneasiness

between the two organizations. In fact,

there were -- there was a brief struggle,

skirmish, that kind of occurred, some bad

feelings, some other things. It took Dr.

King's arrival here to ease those problems

out, to kind of smooth that over. We

insisted on following the same principles

that we had learned from Dr. King during the

Meredith march in Mississippi and other

places.

Q. Did the Invaders with its

relationship with SCLC play a role in the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

86

first march that Dr. King led here on the

28th of March, 1967, on behalf of the

sanitation workers' strike?

A. We did not play an active role in

that march because the night before, Reverend

Jim Lawson and reverend H. Ralph Jackson came

to the steering committee and presented a

letter with bullets in it and said that they

had been sent by the Invaders and that we had

threatened them. Consequently I ordered the

members of our organization off the streets,

not to participate.

Q. So the clergy-led steering committee

received from somewhere --

A. From somewhere.

Q. -- a letter with some bullets in it?

A. Yes.

Q. And that was represented as having

been sent by the Invaders?

A. That's right.

Q. It was taken as a threat by the more

traditional civil rights groups here?

A. Yes. They were very annoyed with

us. They didn't like our style. They didn't

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

87

like the blue jeans, the long hair. I used

to have hair.

Q. Dr. Smith, style aside, did the

Invaders send that threat to --

A. No, no.

Q. -- to the organization?

A. Quite frankly, the protocol for

groups like ours, if we intended on sending a

message, we sent a message. We were not

interested in showing --

Q. Let me move you on. You know the

march on the 28th of March became violent?

A. Yes.

Q. That was perhaps the only violent

march or march that turned violent that Dr.

King ever led.

A. Yes.

Q. And you know that the Invaders have

been blamed for causing that disruption.

A. Yes.

Q. And you know that Dr. King returned

to Memphis to lead another march on his fatal

trip here as a result of that violent march?

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

88

Q. Now, let me ask you, did the Invaders

disrupt that march?

A. No.

Q. How was that march disrupted? Who

disrupted that march, to the best of your

knowledge?

A. We received --

Q. Strike that. Let me rephrase that.

Did you conduct as an organization an

investigation?

A. Yes. I personally conducted an

investigation. I ordered a complete

investigation to see if any of our people

were involved. As I said, I put an order out

that our people would not attend the march

because we had already, once that letter had

been sent with the bullets in it, we knew

that we would receive the blame.

Our people started to report the

influx of other individuals who were coming

in with Illinois license plates who were seen

about town, who were seen on Beale Street by

our affiliates on Beale Street, and who were

members of several organizations, some the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

89

Black Egyptians out of East St. Louis, some

reported to have been Blackstone Rangers out

of Chicago.

Q. So these were strangers that came to

Memphis just prior to this march. Is that

what you are saying?

A. That's right.

Q. Why would they have come to Memphis?

A. We have no idea, because usually when

organizations came to town, they would

contact us. The Black Egyptians did. Chuck

Cohen and some other people did in fact

contact our people in an appropriate

fashion. The ones we were concerned about

were unidentified.

This is very unusual, because the

nature of the movement was such that people

relied on each other for housing, for

accommodations, for transportation, for

information, for all kinds of things. The

nature of the movement was a very communal

kind of thing. Everybody helped everybody if

we could.

Q. What did you learn about the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

90

disruption of that march and what do you know

about -- from personal knowledge do you know

about how that march was disrupted?

A. That march was disrupted, in my

opinion, by police and by agents from parts

unknown who came here specifically to

embarrass Dr. King and to disrupt the march.

The FBI reports, classified reports that have

since been released, indicate to me that

through the informants that they -- they

always black out the name of the

informants -- always indicate that there were

plans to disrupt our activities, to single

out the individuals in my organization and

several other organizations as the kind of

fall guys.

We were supposed to be the ones who

would be blamed. Some indication was that

the march was supposed to be stopped at Main

Street and turned south on Main instead of

being allowed to turn north where we were

supposed to have had a warehouse with weapons

in it and we were going to start a race war.

Q. This was the kind of rumor that you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

91

heard?

A. Yes, yes.

Q. As a result of the violent disruption

of the march, Dr. King decided to come back

to Memphis?

A. Yes.

Q. And the Invaders established yet a

closer working relationship with him?

A. Yes.

Q. This time?

A. Yes.

Q. Were you going to work closely in the

preparation of the next march?

A. Yes, yes. There were some essential

problems with that first march. There were

no marshals. There were no people on the

march route who would establish what the

perimeters of the march would be. In a

disciplined march, you always have to have

someone organize the flanks to keep the

people separated from the pedestrians, so to

speak, who would stand there, even though we

encouraged people to join the march, the idea

is you have to have very disciplined people

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

92

who will not break windows, who will not run,

who will not panic, who will not be afraid,

in case we met force.

The marshals were instructed to

protect people, to show them how not to panic

and cause themselves to be hurt. That didn't

exist in the first march. In the second

march, Dr. King made an agreement for the

Invaders to participate in the march, to be

marshals for the march, to protect

individuals and to make certain that we were

not blamed for things that ultimately

happened in the first march.

Q. Just reverting quickly to the

break-up of the first march, do you know

which hotel Dr. King was taken to when that

march turned violent?

A. Yes. He was taken to the Rivermont.

It was a Holiday Inn flagship, which is now

an apartment building. But when our people

went up there, he had no guards on his room,

they went straight to the room and were able

to see Dr. King without anybody protecting

him. We thought that was horrendous. We

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

93

thought that that was -- we really were very

afraid for Dr. King at that time.

Q. In the planning in which you were

engaged in the second march, the march that

Dr. King never made, the march which in fact

became a memorial march for his death, did

you take up rooms under the -- with the

financial support of his organization?

A. Yes. Yes.

Q. Did you take up those rooms at the

Lorraine Motel?

A. Yes.

Q. The very place where Dr. King was

assassinated?

A. Yes. As a part of the organization.

Q. Do you recall how many rooms the

Invaders had there?

A. They had two rooms.

Q. And how many Invaders were in those

rooms at that time?

A. The total numbers probably ran to

about twenty, from ten to twenty Invaders.

Some would leave and come back. Other people

would come. But around ten to twenty.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

94

Q. And this was a part of your working

arrangement with Dr. King so you would be on

site to plan with him. Is that right?

A. That's right. And to assist in

SCLC's efforts in whatever fashion was

required.

Q. Were the Invaders at some point

summarily asked to leave the Lorraine Motel?

A. My field representatives called and

reported they had been asked to leave the

hotel, that they had been put out.

Q. When did that take place?

A. Just a little while before the

assassination.

Q. On the day of April 4th?

A. On the day of April 4th.

Q. Close to the time of the

assassination?

A. Yes. Within a few hours.

Q. Excuse me.

A. Within a few hours.

Q. Did the Invaders in fact leave the

motel at that time?

A. Yes. It was a very difficult

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

95

situation. Some Invaders were still there,

but once put out of the room, the main body

of our group had to do what they were asked

to do. At the time that I received the

report from the people in the field, they

were also concerned about a number of other

things.

There was no police presence. It

was a very confused situation. We did not

know who was in charge. Some of -- I could

not get a clear answer about who gave the

order to put the Invaders out of the hotel.

Q. We may come to that with other

witnesses. But were you surprised that you

were asked to leave the hotel?

A. Yes. Yes.

Q. This was not in accordance with your

arrangements with Dr. King?

A. No, it was not. Dr. King had agreed

to involve the Invaders. He had chastised

his people for making it difficult for the

Invaders to operate along with them. We had

a very good relationship.

Dr. King probably is the reason --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

96

James Lawson and Dr. King are the reasons

that I have spent almost thirty-five years of

my life in the movement.

MR. PEPPER: No further

questions. Your witness.

THE COURT: Do you expect your

cross-examination to be lengthy?

MR. GARRISON: I don't think it

will be terribly long. I'll go on if you

want me to.

THE COURT: I'll take about five

seconds. Then you can continue with your

examination.

(Brief recess.)

THE COURT: Mr. Garrison.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Dr. Smith, if I may ask you a few

questions, I would appreciate it. Let me ask

you, during the time that you were working

with Dr. King's group, were you made aware of

any threats against Dr. King by any source?

A. No.

Q. And when Dr. King came in the first

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

97

time when there was a march and there was a

riot and he had gone back to Atlanta, are you

aware of the fact that he planned to come

back or said I'll be back? How was that

left?

A. I was aware that Dr. King was going

to be back. We were extremely interested in

making sure that the march worked, that the

sanitation workers' strike was successful.

Q. Among the group that you were with,

Dr. Smith, the Invaders, was there a

gentleman whose name was Merrell McCullough?

A. Yes.

Q. What part did he play in this?

A. Merrell McCullough was our director

of transportation. He had the only car and

the only gas. So we made him the minister of

transportation. That should have made us

leery right there. We're talking about some

poor youngsters in a very poor town. I guess

you can say that Memphis is still a poor

town.

We didn't have anything. We didn't

have any money. We got around the best we

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

98

could, which was usually to bum a ride. In

fact, the police would sometimes have to give

us a ride. The ones that were watching us

would sometimes give us a ride.

McCullough was a very accessible

person. He would come to my home every day,

as he would go around all the Invaders. When

I met him, he was introduced to me by what we

call the Riverside Invaders, who brought him

into the organization.

Q. Did you later learn that he at that

time was working undercover for the Memphis

Police Department?

A. Yes. I was invited down to the

police department after Dr. King was

assassinated, and I was introduced to him by

inspector types of the Memphis Police

Department as Officer Merrell McCullough.

Q. And would it surprise you to learn

that he was brought into Mr. Jowers'

restaurant by another officer and introduced

as Officer Merrell McCullough?

A. I did not know about that until much

later on, but I was extremely surprised. I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

99

think one of the reasons I was surprised is

because we felt that there were people who

would infiltrate our group, but we did not

have any idea that the infiltration was of a

nature broader than the local police

department.

We knew that many members of the --

many men who are now members of the police

department, in fact, the former police

director who has just recently resigned, was

also an undercover agent in our

organization.

Q. Dr. Smith, the day that the

assassination occurred, you were along with

some other members of your group in a room or

two rooms at the Lorraine Motel. Am I

correct, sir?

A. The members of my organization were

there.

Q. What floor were you on?

A. On the second floor.

Q. All right. Was there a time that day

that you had occasion to look across the

street to see what was down on the street

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

100

below the motel and across over there on the

other side? Did you have any occasion to do

that that day that you recall?

A. I did not. On that day I had to

leave to maintain what we call our

information center. What I had to do was to

receive the information from around the city

from our various locations where we thought

the strategic information that told us what

was happening with the strike itself, with

the plans for events and activities, in

preparation for the strategy team's meeting

and that sort of thing.

Q. All the time that you were at the

hotel and the going and coming, do you ever

remember seeing anyone in that brush area

there across from the hotel? Do you ever

recall any activity, seeing anyone in that

area?

A. No, I did not see anyone in that

area.

MR. GARRISON: Dr. Smith, I had

hair once like you. Thank you.

THE COURT: Any redirect?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

101

MR. PEPPER: Very briefly, Your

Honor.

THE COURT: Go ahead.

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Dr. Smith, do you know where Merrell

McCullough is employed today?

A. I understand he is employed at the

Central Intelligence Agency out of Langley,

Maryland.

Q. Langley, Virginia?

A. Virginia.

MR. PEPPER: No further

questions.

THE COURT: All right. You may

stand down, Dr. Smith.

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: All right, ladies

and gentlemen, we're going to take our lunch

break at this time. We'll resume at two

o'clock.

(Lunch recess.)

THE COURT: All right. Bring

the jury out, please.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

102

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: All right,

Mr. Pepper. Call your next witness.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you, Your

Honor.

Plaintiffs call in Charles Cabbage.

CHARLES CABBAGE

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Cabbage.

A. How are you doing, sir.

Q. For the record, would you state your

full name and address, please.

A. Charles Laverne Cabbage, 1942 Florida

Street, Number 6, Memphis, Tennessee.

Q. Thank you very much for coming down

here this afternoon.

A. You are perfectly welcome.

Q. We've heard testimony earlier about

the Invaders and the background and the

purpose of the organization and all of that

detail.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

103

What I want to do is I want to move

on with you. Would you tell us what your

position was in the Invaders around the time

of 1968?

A. Around 1968 -- first of all, let me

try to clear something up here as far as the

name "Invaders" goes. My title was execute

secretary of the Black Organizing Project,

which was a project that we had put together

and made up one of the groups we organized.

The press actually just gave us the name

"Invaders" and it kind of stuck. You know,

it kind of stuck. A lot of people can kind

of relate to that.

Generally we were referred to as the

Invaders about, but actually my title was

executive secretary, Black Organizing

Project.

Q. What was your role in the Black

Organizing Project and that group in

particular?

A. Well, basically training street

organizers, going on to campuses, trying to

set up various and different groups,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

104

educating, trying to empower black people

basically, trying to make an impression on

the structure, the power structure, as it was

at the time, generally raising the

consciousness of black people at that time

period. We were basically facing difficult

times.

Q. Consciousness-raising activities?

A. Absolutely.

Q. Now, when the march Dr. King led on

the 28th of March broke up into a riot, did

you and any of the members of the

organization meet with Dr. King shortly after

that?

A. We did. We met afterward. We had

made an effort to meet with him before then,

before the march. There were many

indications that there was going to be a

serious problem, but we were unable to reach

him at the time.

After the riot occurred, we made an

effort to meet with him then. We knew he was

staying at the Rivermont. That was public

knowledge at the time. So a group of us we

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

105

met out at John's apartment out in south

Memphis and we decided that we best go over

there and try to get a chance to talk to him

and let him know what the situation was, what

he had walked into.

Q. Some of you went along to the

Rivermont to meet with Dr. King. Would

that -- when would that have been? Would

have been the day after the riot?

A. You are going to have to help me here

with these dates and times here. We're

talking about a long time ago. As near as I

can recollect, I think it was probably been

the next day.

Q. The riot took place on the 28th of

March. You would have met with him on the

29ing of March?

A. Probably. Probably.

Q. When you went to the Rivermont to

meet with Dr. King after this disruption, did

you notice any security at the Rivermont for

him that the point?

A. No. It was nonexistent. It is kind

of strange you should ask that question,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

106

because when we decided to go, that's the

first thing we thought about, how were we

going to get past the security, because we

knew that there would be some.

So one of the fellows that was with

us at the time, he said, well, we'll try and

see if we can't get through the back door.

We walked through the back door. Lo and

behold, the back door came straight open, I

mean, no problem at all. We walked right

into the door, upstairs to his room, knocked

on the door, never saw a soul, no one.

Q. You went directly up to his room?

A. Directly.

Q. You knocked on the door?

A. Yes.

Q. Was there any security inside the

room?

A. No security.

Q. Who answered the door?

A. I think Reverend Abernathy answered

the door. No, wait a minute. Let me get

this straight. Was it Bernard Shaw that was

with him at the time. You have to help me

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

107

here. I think Bernard answered the door

because I think Dr. King was in the bathroom

putting on his tie. I think Reverend

Abernathy was standing in the background.

I introduced myself, told Mr. Shaw

my name is Charles Cabbage, I'd like to talk

to Dr. King, I represent the Invader

organization. Reverend Abernathy immediately

said, stop, no, the doctor does not want to

talk to you all now.

At this particular time I heard Dr.

King call out from the bathroom, he said, no,

let him in because I want to talk to him. So

we went in the room and sat down and we had a

nice long talk.

Q. Basically what was the nature of that

conversation?

A. We had brought along some literature,

discussing, you know -- explaining our

position on certain issues, describing our

organization, its structure, some of our

goals and objectives.

We were really trying to demonstrate

to him that the rumors that had been spread

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

108

about us were untrue and unfounded, that we

were really not out to create any kind of

disruptive behavior in the City of Memphis,

that we were really about basically, like I

said, consciousness-raising, introducing the

concept of the empowerment of black people at

the time generally referred to as black

power. That was almost a criminal offense at

that particular time.

We felt there was some work that

needed to be done. In the process of

presenting our literature to him, we also

presented parts of a program that we had put

together that we wanted to try to establish

into the community called the Community

Unification Program. We were seeking funding

at that particulars time.

But the conversation never really

got into the literature itself. They looked

it over and went immediately to the march and

what happened.

Q. How did Dr. King react to this

conversation that you had with him?

A. Dr. King was hot hostile. He was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

109

positive all the way. His first reaction

was, and it kind of shocked me in a way,

because I was expecting him to be hostile and

I was expecting him to be a bit defensive,

you know, because the information that he had

received was that we were opposed to

everything he stood for, and the first

question he asked me was, you know, Brother

Cabbage, why did you all do this to me? I

explained to him, I said, Doc, we did not do

this to you.

Our intention from the very

beginning has been, first of all, we did not

want you to come here because we had been

organizing around -- we had been organizing

around not a non-violent theme at that

particular time. For him to walk into

Memphis trying to lead a non-violent

demonstration on the occasion we're talking

about was just walking into the jaws of a

tiger. It was in our best interest as well

as his for him not to be here. We wanted him

not here.

So we weren't able to accomplish

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

110

that, because we really just didn't have the

voice that we wanted in the meetings and

strategy sessions that were being held at the

time that was controlling the sanitation

strike and those events.

Q. There came a time as a result of this

meeting and other discussions that your

organization came to agree to work with

Dr. King in terms of the following march, the

next march that was planned?

A. All this was discussed -- all this

came about that day in that meeting, because,

know, after I had told -- I don't want to

make it sound like I'm giving Dr. King

advice, but I tried to inform him as best as

I could of what the situation was, the

volatility of the situation and some of the

things that he could do to be able to come

into Memphis and be able to have a

non-violent demonstration.

I let him know that we had been

organizing around counter-themes for at least

a year, that a lot of people were aware of

it, and in order for him to be able to pull a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

111

successful non-violent march off here in

Memphis, that he needs to pull up all the

way, go back to Atlanta, reorganize, send in

some workers to begin to teach non-violent

doctrines and discipline, because in order to

be able to do and accomplish what they were

setting out -- what they were attempting to

do would take some serious training.

Q. When you met with him and were

agreeing to work together, you took up

residence in the Lorraine Motel as a means of

a place for working with him for manning the

second march. Is that right?

A. His suggestion was one of the things

we need to do then was probably try to work

together. He said, what I will do is we will

go back and I'll send some people in and

we're going to put you and maybe some of your

people on the staff. We agreed immediately,

you know.

From that point on we decided when

they came back, they were contacted. When

they came back, I don't remember the exact

time line on this, but we took up in the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

112

Lorraine Motel, we took the two rooms on the

top floor, the right-hand side of the

building.

Q. Do you know how many people were in

those two rooms?

A. We just had the two rooms. At that

time we were young. They just stayed full

all the time.

Q. Those rooms were on the balcony

level, the upper level?

A. Balcony level, yes.

Q. The same level on which he was

assassinated?

A. Yes.

Q. Did there come a time when you were

asked to leave those rooms?

A. Yes.

Q. When was that?

A. This was after the third meeting that

we had had. Let me try and explain this.

After the organizers for SCLC had come to

Memphis, had come back to Memphis after Dr.

King had left, Reverend Orange, Carl Reader

(Phonetic) and some of the others at that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

113

time, we began to go out into the community

and have workshops.

So we began to get to be quite

friendly. We got along well. So when Dr.

King came back, we began to meet downstairs

in the dining room. We had two meetings

downstairs in the dining room. We had one in

his room. And in the meeting we were

discussing how we would be able to pull the

march off.

And one of the things that we had

decided that would be necessary would be that

the Invaders would be involved in actually

marshalling the demonstration. I had

problems with that initially because I didn't

think I could sell that to the group. So

when I took this back to our board up on the

second floor where we were staying, we had

heated arguments about it, but eventually got

this over to the entire group and we agreed

to marshal the parade. This is after the

second meeting we probably -- finally came to

a decision and we were on board to act as

marshals.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

114

Q. You were on board after the second

meeting?

A. After the second meeting we were on

board.

Q. After the third meeting somehow you

were told to leave the hotel?

A. Now, John had to remind me of this.

After the second meeting after we had come to

the conclusion that we were all going to work

together on this, that we had as much at

stake in it as they did, so, therefore, it

would be the right thing for us to do, we had

sort of an impromptu meeting in Dr. King's

room where we had some final points to work

out. That meeting lasted maybe about five to

ten minutes. We go back to the hotel, to our

rooms, and we discussed it a little bit, and

we sat around, and here comes a knock on the

door.

Q. There was a knock on the door?

A. Yeah.

Q. This was on the 4th of April?

A. Yes.

Q. On the day of the assassination?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

115

A. Yes, sir.

Q. What time was this knock on the door?

A. It took us about twenty minutes to

clear the room.

Q. So it took you twenty minutes to

clear the room?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. What is the significance of that?

What time does that make it?

A. We weren't really keeping no watch or

time on this. We weren't really watching the

clock per se. But from some of the things

that I read from some of the investigations

that had been carried out since then, I think

we left out about ten until six or eleven

until six or something like this.

Q. You were told to leave?

A. Yeah.

Q. Sometime within a half hour,

thirty-five minutes, of the killing you left?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. You left at ten minutes to six, which

is about eleven minutes before the killing?

A. See, this is did --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

116

Q. Somewhere in there?

A. I always felt that as we were pulling

out -- it took us a little while to get

organized to get out of the room. There were

quite a few of us there. We got out as

quickly as we could. We weren't ready to

go. We were there all day for meetings and

everything.

There was only one car there, that

was mine. We threw things in the car, got in

the car. As soon as we got in the car and

drove up Mulberry, this is when I heard the

shot.

Q. Very shortly after you --

A. Before I could make it to Main

Street.

Q. Why were you asked to leave the motel

within minutes of the killing?

A. There is a lot of conjecture on

that. I do not know. I mean, it is

illogical. It doesn't make any sense.

Check-out time is the next day.

Q. Was your room paid for through that

evening?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

117

A. Yes. I mean, SCLC was taking care of

the entire bill.

Q. So they had paid for it through the

evening?

A. I don't know what their records

indicate, but I would assume if they had

already rented the room, you know, then --

they don't rent them by the half day. It was

just a totally illogical move. It didn't

make any sense.

Q. Who gave the orders for you to leave

the motel?

A. Izzy answered the door. I wouldn't

have been the one to answer the door. Izzy

answer the door. Izzy, from my best

recollection, says that one of the maids had

come by to clean the room and asked us to

leave, they said that you all would have to

leave.

Next came Reverend Orange and came

in and explained to us that, hey, man, you

all will have to leave. Nobody asked why

because -- you know, we had feelings that

there was something very, very wrong because

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

118

it was sort of a surreal kind of a day. But

we had no inkling that he would have been

assassinated that afternoon.

Q. He was assassinated within a very few

minutes of your being told to leave. Did

anyone ask the maid who gave the instructions

for you to leave?

A. Not to my recollection. Not to my

recollection. Nobody asked her that. I

asked Orange why we got to leave.

Q. And what did he say?

A. My best recollection -- I don't know

how to put this. Jessie said you got to go.

Q. Jessie?

A. Yeah.

Q. Jessie Jackson said you had to go?

A. Yes.

Q. Was Jessie Jackson a person who

worked closely with your organization?

A. No, no.

Q. Who were the SCLC people who worked

closely with you?

A. Carl Reader and Orange.

Q. Why would Reverend Jackson be the one

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

119

to give you instructions for you to leave?

A. I never questioned that. I assumed

by him handling the money it was a clear-cut

decision for him saying -- the way it came

down, we were not paying for the room, Jessie

was not authorizing payment for the room

anymore, so you all have to leave.

Q. They already had paid for the room

apparently?

A. This I realize now, but at that

particular time we never knew how serious

these minutes and seconds were, you know, to

a significant historical event. I mean, in

hindsight we can see these things, but as

they occurred, you know, who would take time

to remember anything like that and write it

down or jot it down.

Q. So, Charles, I put it to you your

testimony this afternoon is that you were

asked to leave late in the day close to the

time of the killing, you did leave --

A. Yeah.

Q. -- and then you heard the shot within

a short time after you left?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

120

A. As soon as I pulled off the lot and

made a right turn, got beside the fire

station, the shot rang out. We all ducked

down in the car. Normally we would make a

right turn to go down to Beale Street and

turn left to get on the interstate. This

time when we heard the shot we immediately

began --

See, we had a different route from

leaving the hotel. At night we would take a

different route because of the police

surveillance around the hotel at night. So

we took a left turn, took Calhoun, went

toward the river, took a back street to

Florida street, got to Crump, went back over

to Castle, I think it was, and went over the

railroad tracks and back alleys and made it

all the way to south Memphis.

Q. Did you notice any security, any

police presence or security, in the motel

late that afternoon before you left and after

you left?

A. Not at any time.

Q. I'm sorry?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

121

A. Not at any time.

Q. You didn't notice any security?

A. There was none. There was never any

security, never.

MR. PEPPER: No further

questions, Your Honor.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Mr. Cabbage, I have two or three

questions I would to ask you if you don't

mind.

Before this date of April the 4th

when you were asked to leave the room, did

you ever learn of any threats against Dr.

King? Was it common that you heard any

threats against him?

A. Yeah.

Q. Was it a pretty much common

day-to-day thing?

A. No, this was a direct knock on my

front door to my house, which made it even

more expedient for us to try and get to him

and let him know. There was a gentleman that

knocked on my mother's front door. We were

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

122

sitting in the house.

He came inside and introduced

himself. He was from South Africa. He came

in and sat down, sirens wailing, fires going

off all over the city, curfew on.

This man came into our house, sat

down and talked to me and told me, said,

Charles, I'm going to tell you something,

they are going to kill Dr. King in Memphis.

I done about passed out.

Q. Is that the day before the

assassination?

A. I can't recall that date. I really

can't.

Q. Was it the general feeling of the

Invaders that it was unsafe for Dr. King to

come here to Memphis?

A. Absolutely.

Q. You didn't want him to come here?

A. No, we did not.

Q. Is that because it was not safe to

come?

A. It was unsafe, and we knew that

because of the position that we had taken

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

123

politically that if anything went wrong, that

we would be the one to blame for it.

Q. They would blame it on your group?

A. Absolutely.

Q. Did you recall a gentleman in your

group named Merrell McCullough?

A. Yes, I do.

Q. What part did he play with your

group?

A. Merrell first came into the

organization because of the activities that

we were conducting out at Memphis State. We

were organizing the Black Students

Association out there. Merrell I think was

attending classes out there. I think John B.

Reddin told him.

He was interested and wanted to

learn more about the condition of black

people in this condition, so John brought him

to the apartment where we were generally

holding these meetings, which were generally

open to anybody who wanted to attend, they

could come. And Merrell came.

Q. The day that you were organizing in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

124

the room before the assassination,

Mr. Cabbage, was Merrell McCullough there,

was he one of the ones?

A. No, he was not there. He was with

Reverend Orange.

Q. Do you know where Merrell McCullough

was when you left the room that day?

A. He and Reverend Orange gone out

shopping or something like this. We knew

that he was the police, but what can you do

about this. You know you are going to be

infiltrated. We made him minister of

transportation. He had a car. We gave him

something to do.

Then when we made the alliance with

SCLC and began to work with SCLC, he came

along with the group. So now he is moving

driving people around, some of the SCLC staff

people around. It is just of the one of the

quirks the way things happened. He ended up

driving the SCLC staff around. We did not

know he was as highly connected as he was.

Q. Let me ask you this: You said you

were ordered to leave sometime late that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

125

afternoon before six o'clock?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you see Reverend Jackson at the

motel before you left?

A. Yes, he was at the meeting.

Q. Late that afternoon?

A. We met during the day. If you want

to go into the event, we can talk about the

meeting, but he was there at the hotel that

day. As a matter of fact, he was the last

person we saw as we left the meeting. He was

standing down by the pool.

Q. He was down on the parking level,

lower level?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. And did you see Dr. King talking to

reverend Jessie Jackson?

A. Not at that time, no.

Q. Mr. Cabbage, let me ask you this:

You were in the room facing the street over

across from the rooming house across there,

weren't you?

A. We were right by where the pool used

to be.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

126

Q. Did you ever look over there and see

in the brushy area where it was raised up off

the street with a concrete barrier, I think

it is, and a lot of trees, did you ever see

anyone in there moving around in the bushes

that you could tell?

A. No. I never really paid any

attention to it. We were constantly moving

around, our people, because we provided our

own security, and no reports ever came to me

that we ever saw anything or anybody at that

particular time.

Q. When you heard the shot the day that

it occurred, did you go back to the scene or

did you go ahead and leave?

A. We immediately went to Riverside

Community. We got stopped once by a police

officer, a young guy. I don't know who he

was. He was nervous. He talked to us and he

let us go. That took about five minutes.

We went directly to my mother's

house. She come running. As I pulled up in

front of the house, she is rushing down to

the house crying, screaming to the top of her

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

127

voice, they just shot Dr. King, they just

shot Dr. King.

I immediately began to think, oh, my

God, how far is this going to go, because we

were aware that the assassination plot was on

because of the fellow that had come to my

house. So what I did was I got out of the

car and turned the car over to some of the

other people in our organization, sent it

back down to the hotel to see in the event

anybody else would be targeted, if we could

be of any assistance security-wise. We

weren't trained professionals or anything

like that. Anybody in a situation like that

would try to help.

MR. GARRISON: That's all I

have. Thank you, sir.

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Mr. Cabbage, do you know who the man

was who came into your home and told you that

Dr. King was going to be assassinated?

A. He introduced himself as John Laue.

Q. I'm sorry?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

128

A. He introduced himself as John Laue.

Q. John Laue?

A. Yes.

Q. How do you spell his last name?

A. I didn't ask for a spelling, but

there was another John Laue present at the

hotel who spelled his name L O U E, I think,

but, you know, this man was an entirely

different -- a totally different description.

Q. Was there man black or white?

A. He was Middle Eastern, long brown

hair. I'd remember him again if I saw him.

I never saw him again.

Q. Did you know him previously?

A. No. Never seen him before in my

life.

Q. Never seen him before in your life?

A. No.

Q. Could his name have been spelled

L A U E?

A. Something like that. I may have the

spelling wrong. I didn't ask him how to

spell his name is what I'm trying to say. I

do remember him saying that his name was John

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

129

Laue. I do remember that.

Q. Did you ask him how he knew there was

going to be an assassination?

A. He just said he knew.

Q. He just said he knew?

A. Yeah.

Q. You didn't ask him how he knew?

A. No.

Q. Do you know where he was employed?

A. He said he was a photographer a

freelance photographer, a journalist.

Q. Freelance photographer?

A. Freelance photographer journalist

from South Africa.

Q. Was his first name John or Joseph?

A. I'm saying that he said he introduced

himself as John Laue.

Q. Charles, was it routine practice for

some of the Invaders to carry weapons?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And why would they carry weapons?

A. Basically for protection.

Q. Protection against whom?

A. Well, it was a hostile environment we

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

130

were working in. We had numerous

confrontations with the police. There were

armed bands of white citizens who rode around

in the community with high-powered rifles in

their car. Some of us had been shot at

before. It was basically for self-defense.

Q. When you saw Reverend Jackson

standing down at the swimming pool, was he

doing anything?

A. Well, he said -- he had his arms

folded and checking the time seeing how long

it would take us to get out of the hotel.

Q. He was looking at his watch?

A. He was checking it.

Q. Lastly, did you have the occasion as

a result of your suspicion of a white person

who wanted to associate with the Invaders to

go through some personal documents of that

person?

A. That was an incident that occurred.

This was a year prior to. A gentleman with

military intelligence -- we used to hang out

at a place called the Log Cabin. This is

where we used to meet on South Parkway. This

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

131

guy come stumbling in drunk, strange in the

first place, because he had to be nuts being

there in south Memphis at this particular

time anyway.

He comes into our meeting room. He

was immediately stopped, frisked and robbed.

In the process of being robbed, somebody took

his wallet. In going through the wallet, we

found a military intelligence ID and three

dollars.

Q. And three dollars?

A. Three dollars.

Q. You found an identification card with

military intelligence officer?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. This was about a year before the

killing?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. This would be then in 1967?

A. 1967, yes. Yes, sir.

MR. PEPPER: No further

questions.

THE COURT: All right. You may

stand down, sir. Thank you.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

132

(Witness excused.)

JOHN McFERREN

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

THE COURT: Sit back and relax.

THE WITNESS: Yes, sir.

THE COURT: Thank you.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Good afternoon Mr.

McFerren.

A. Glad to be here.

Q. Thank you for coming. Would you

state your full name and address for the

record, please.

A. My full name is John McFerren,

spelled J O H N, capital M C F ER R E N,

McFerren.

Q. And your address, Mr. McFerren?

A. 7615 Highway 195, Somerville, spelled

S O M E R V I L L E, zip code is 38068.

Q. Thank you. John, would you just tell

the Court, please, and the jury a bit of your

background, how you come to be where you are

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

133

today.

A. First of all, I'd like to say my

granddaddy was brought here five years before

the Civil War in chains. He was a slave.

And lesser than a mile and a half from the

store, the record will show in 1867 he gave

seven dollars and a half for four hundred

acres of land. We have some of that in the

family yet.

Q. John, did there come a time in 1959

or 1960 that you became involved in civil

rights activity, voter registration activity,

in Fayette County and the area of Somerville?

A. Well, I'd like to please the Court to

go back a little bit further than that how I

got deeply involved. I met Gerald Estes in

Camp Ellis, Illinois, and later I met him

again in 1957. In 1957 he was a young

practicing attorney. He came to Somerville

to defend Burton Dotson.

Q. John, what opposition did you meet

when you started, though, moving -- I'm

moving forward -- when you started the voter

registration project in Fayette County?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

134

A. According to the way I got the

records together, before 1960 there was no

negroes registered to vote in that county.

In 1957 me and Mr. Estes and the others got

together. He was the legal counsel. We

formed a league called the Fayette County

Civic & Welfare League to set out to get

negroes registered to vote.

At that time the negroes didn't have

no chance, and the law, they would pick them

up, sentence them, and put them out on the

road, and a negro didn't have no chance. The

only way we could figure out to change that

landscape was through the ballot box.

Q. What did you do?

A. We formed this group. It was the

first -- around about April or May in 1959 to

get the negroes registered to vote. We got a

small majority of negroes registered, and we

had a local sheriff election. The local man

that we was supporting was named L. T.

Redbanks. He run for sheriff against the

local sheriff. The Democrat party refused to

let us vote.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

135

That's how it got started. That's

how it got started. When they refused to let

us vote, on August the 12th, 1959, Gerald

Estes filed a suit against the Democratic

party asking for us to have the right to cast

our ballot.

Q. What happened as a result of that

action?

A. Well, that was in 1959. In 1960, the

early part of 1960, we was still pushing to

get negroes registered to vote, and the local

editor of the Fayette Falcon was named

Coaster. The wavy understand it, the

Commercial Appeal man name here was named

Coaster. They was kinfolks.

When we got it going, he put an ad

in the Fayette Falcon and the Commercial

Appeal that they was going to make a thousand

negroes move off the land in 1960, that

winter.

During that time in 1960, if you

registered, you had to move. The leaders of

the movement, the citizen council and the

Klu Klux Klan, they had a list that later

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

136

that we got ahold to it through by borrowing

it from the Klu Klux Klan's secretary. Ebony

magazine published the list. We got ahold of

it, forwarded it -- we got a photostatic copy

of it, and the made carried it back and put

it in the safe and they never knew how we got

the list.

The list in this Ebony magazine had

all -- had A's behind it, that you couldn't

buy nothing nowhere. I was the leader of the

group, and they run me out of every wholesale

house in Memphis.

Q. Now, this was an embargo list, this

was a list of people who no wholesale house

should sell any products of any sort. Is

that what you are saying?

A. Wouldn't sell them for money at no

price.

Q. Moving on now, John, what kind of

business were you in, what kind of business

did you take over?

A. Well, my brother, he had the store.

And he had an education and always followed

saw mills and such. He said, I'm going to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

137

move, I'm just going to leave. He thought he

was the one that was behind the movement all

the time, and I was the one who was

spearheading the movement with the people.

He moved to Memphis and left them

out there. When he moved to Memphis, then

Gulf Oil Company, they jumped in the

squeeze. In 1960 no oil company would sell

no black farmers no gasoline, no oil and no

seed in 1960.

It was a liberal at Eades named Ben

Roafer. He told all the farmers to come down

there to him and he'd sell them what they

want. He had more business than he could

look at.

During that time I made friends with

the underworld. What I mean by the

underworld, they run me out of every

wholesale house in Memphis but Malone &

Hyde. The bread companies wouldn't sell

nothing to me. There was a young bread man

who said, tell you what you do, you meet me

out there on Summer Avenue and I'll sell you

off the bread off the truck.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

138

I would come to Memphis and meet him

on Summer Avenue in Memphis in a 1955 Ford

car. That's what I had. I would come to

Memphis and meet him on Summer Avenue and get

bread. They Klan would get after me every

night or two.

I had -- which I'm a top mechanic

myself on the old models. To make a car run

fast and turn curves faster, if you noticed,

a 1955 Ford has got a solid frame in the

front. We took the torch and cut two inches

out of the frame in the front. That brought

the front wheels in and let the back wheels

be wider, and we had chains on -- see, a 1955

Ford has got straight springs behind it.

That let the car wheels up when it would go

around a sharp curve, it would slide around.

At that time, which I could see a

nail in the highway now, at that time my

vision was better and I could drive just like

I was standing still, and when they'd get

after me, I'd cut over in them back roads,

and them new cars couldn't turn good like

me. At that time wasn't no two-way radios in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

139

cars. During that time we had Tent City

going.

Q. John, let me stop you there. Would

you just tell the Court and the jury what

Tent City was?

A. Tent City, we went to Washington, and

me and my attorney, Carrie Porter Boyd and

one other guy. At that time this was under

the Eisenhower Administration, and they filed

an injunction against the landowners from

stop making the tenant farmers move. And

this was under the Eisenhower

Administration.

That was in 1961. President Kennedy

got elected in 1961 in November, and he took

office in 1962.

Q. Well, John, let's back up a minute.

It is a historical fact that John Kennedy was

elected in 1960, took office January 20th of

1961. So it is a year back.

A. A year back. I'm just --

Q. That's okay. Continue.

A. And during that time that I was

leading my folks and all this was -- we'd

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

140

have meetings to discuss it, and I decided

the only way to be successful in political

ranks would be independent from the citizen's

council and the Klu Klux Klan.

What I mean by being independent,

stay out of the Klan's pocketbook. When you

borrow money from the Klan, he squeeze up on

you in a minute.

Q. John, what kind of business do you

run today?

A. I run a grocery store and oil

company.

Q. How long have you run that business?

A. I've been running that business since

1960.

Q. That's when you took it over from

your brother?

A. That's when I took it over from my

brother. But now let me run back back just a

second. Shaw, a fellow named Shaw, bought it

from my brother first. He stayed in it about

a month and a half. Because of me going into

the business after then -- there was an

eighty-three year old man named John Lewis.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

141

He said, John, he says, they will starve us

to death, we need somebody in that business

who knows how to do and feed us.

At that time a test was going. If

you get Jet magazine, you can see some of the

people were so poor, they were starving. Of

course, you take most of the people at that

time, they had never been nowhere or no-how

to maneuver out of oppression.

The Jet magazine published some

pictures how poor the folks were at that

time.

Q. In Fayette County?

A. In Fayette County.

Q. Let's move on. You have run this

business all these years?

A. That's correct.

Q. How many days a week is your business

open?

A. The onliest time -- at that time the

business was -- we were running seven days a

week. I had a family. But after I lost --

the Klan tore my family up. I only shuts it

up when I go to pick up merchandise.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

142

Q. Now, where do you buy your

merchandise?

A. All over Memphis.

Q. Where have you always bought your

merchandise?

A. Well, I bought all over Memphis. I'd

buy from Frank Liberto's Produce, I'd buy

from the meat houses, Morrell Meat Company,

Fineberg Meat Company. I know every one in

Memphis.

Q. You sell produce and meats as well?

A. That's correct.

Q. And you sell fuel oil and gasoline?

A. That's correct.

Q. In 1968 where did you buy your

produce?

A. From on market street.

Q. Was there a market there?

A. There was a market there when I first

started coming there.

Q. What did you buy at this market?

A. I'd buy -- on that street, the street

runs north and south, and on that street, the

banana house, the tomato house, and Frank

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

143

Liberto sold most of the produce and

sometimes bananas.

Q. So you bought produce from a

warehouse run by --

A. Frank Liberto.

Q. -- a man framed Frank Liberto. In

1996?

A. That's correct. I did before then.

See, I knew him way before then. Around

about 1960, 1960 or 1961, I got to know him

real well.

Q. How many years had you been buying

produce from Mr. Liberto?

A. Since 1906 or 1961.

Q. Since 1960 or 1961 he ran that

warehouse?

A. He was there then, but I didn't know

his name. When I first started going there,

I didn't know his name like I did later.

Q. What day of the week -- do you recall

what day of the week did you go to pick up

your produce in the year 1968?

A. It was on a Thursday, around

five-fifteen.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

144

Q. So you would -- why would you go

there around five-fifteen every Thursday?

A. Well, you've got to understand how I

made the runs. I first started with Malone &

Hyde on south -- Malone & Hyde was on South

Parkway.

Q. Right.

A. I'd make that run, the dry grocery

run. Then I would come on up and I'd have it

to put my meat on ice and produce on ice.

I'd make them's two places my last pick-ups.

Q. So Liberto's warehouse was your last

pickup?

A. Was the last pickup.

Q. You would get there around

five-fifteen?

A. I got there that day at five-fifteen

exactly.

Q. We're coming to that day. April 4th

was a Thursday, the day Martin Luther King

was assassinated was a Thursday.

A. That's correct.

Q. Did you go to Frank Liberto's place

that day?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

145

A. I went there that day.

Q. You arrived there at what time?

A. Around five-fifteen. Now --

Q. Would you describe what the layout of

the place was and what you did when you

arrived at that warehouse?

A. That warehouse faced east and west,

but you enter in the gate on the south side,

and when I drove around to the north side and

come up about fifteen feet of the door, I

stopped my truck. At that time I had a

three-quarter ton pickup truck with a canvass

on it, a cloth canvass over it.

Q. Okay.

A. When I drove up to the -- when I

stopped the pickup truck out in front of the

door, this door is on the north side, and

there is a big door that could you rollback

and back a truck up in.

Coming in from the north side on the

right side there is a little small office,

and when I got within ten to fifteen feet of

this office, why, Latch was standing up.

Q. Who was Mr. Latch?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

146

A. Mr. Latch had a scar around his neck

like this.

Q. What was his relationship to

Mr. Liberto?

A. He was a handyman. I never did know,

because I was always scared of Mr. Latch.

You see, if you looked at him, he had a scar

from right here to right there, and he would

always be mean, but Mr. Liberto was always

friendly. I wouldn't fool with Mr. Latch. I

would stay away from him if I could.

Q. So you walked in that afternoon, into

the entrance and the office. You said you

were how far from the office?

A. Ten to fifteen feet.

Q. Ten to fifteen feet from the office?

A. That's correct.

Q. Then what happened next?

A. The phone rang. When the phone rang,

Latch picked it up. When Latch picked it up,

Latch said, that's him again. He give it to

Mr. Liberto. Mr. Liberto said, shoot the --

Q. You can just say what he said.

A. Shoot the son-of-a-bitch on the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

147

balcony. Well, at that time they didn't have

noticed me. I was just standing up a little

closer to them just looking.

I was a cash-paying customer. He

would always tell me, you go get what you

want and come by the office and pay for it.

If the warehouse hadn't been changed, the

doors, you have a line formed going in there.

Q. Let's go back over what you saw. You

heard Mr. Liberto talking on the telephone?

A. Telephone.

Q. Around what time of the day was this?

A. I'd say that was around five -- ten

minutes after, five-fifteen, around five

twenty-five, not quite five-thirty.

Q. Five twenty-five to five-thirty you

heard him talking on the telephone?

A. Telephone.

Q. He received a phone call. What did

you hear him say once again?

A. Shoot the son-of-a-bitch on the

balcony.

Q. Shoot the son-of-a-bitch on the

balcony. Then what happened after that?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

148

A. Then he looked around and seen me.

Then they said, go on and get your

merchandise.

The locker is made with two doors,

you open one door, then you walks in and open

another door. I went on in and got my

merchandise, come on back out. Then when I

was coming back out, the phone rang again.

Latch picked it up and give it to

Mr. Liberto. And Mr. Liberto told him to go

to his brother in New Orleans and get his

$5,000.

Mr. Liberto wrote me a ticket. I

never would buy nothing from nowhere without

a bill. He give me a bill. I took the bill,

put my merchandise in the truck, then I went

on the back side of the company out on that

street and I come around to hit Summer Avenue

and hit old 64 home.

When I got home, my wife called and

says, do you know Dr. King done got killed?

I says, I know it. It all come back to me in

my mind what I had heard. That's what I told

her, I know it.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

149

Q. John, did you tell this story at that

time to anyone?

A. I didn't tell it to no one until it

got to worrying me, I wondered what they know

I heard. You know, when you gets kind of

itchy -- that was on a Thursday. So on a

Friday or Saturday, no later than Saturday

morning, Mr. Baxton Bryant, who was a Baptist

white minister that I know in Nashville, I

called him and told him what I had heard.

So that Sunday evening he said,

John, I'm in church now. Says, I'll be there

about four o'clock tomorrow evening. When he

came down about four o'clock that Sunday

evening, we talked it over, and in meantime

he had contacted Mr. Lucius Burch's

son-in-law to meet me and him with the FBI

down here in Memphis.

Q. And did you have a meeting with the

FBI and any local law enforcement people in

Memphis on that Sunday?

A. Well, that night, that Sunday night,

we met with the FBI. Now, I didn't know

whether or not that they was local police or

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

150

somebody else. But the only somebody I know

was the FBI -- one was a tall and one was a

lower.

Q. Did you tell them this story, these

details?

A. I gave them the same details. They

questioned me two or three hours over the

same thing, the same thing. They questioned

me two or three hours over the same thing.

Q. Did you give these details to them on

any other occasion?

A. That Monday, two little young FBI

come out to the store and stayed there half a

day questioning me the same thing. So that

Tuesday Robert Powell from New Orleans come

there, which he used to run a store out there

on 64 highway, and I wasn't at the store when

he came, he -- the lady where I hide was

named Ms. Ida Mae. The record will show that

in my deposition with the FBI. She told them

that I was at the house. So Robert -- I

stayed about an hour and a quarter from the

store.

Robert Powell drove on out there to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

151

the house, and when he come out this to the

house -- I knowed him -- I never did have no

dealings with him, but I knowed him, and he

come out there to see me, and he talked with

me, and at that time he had a big Gulf

station in New Orleans tied up with the

Mafias, I know it.

I wouldn't say much to him, but the

onliest questions he asked me was how to get

to my house from the back roads. It jumped

curious in my mind that all this done

happened and he wanted to know how to come to

my house through the back roads.

Q. John, you told this story. What

happened as a result of your giving this

information to the officials?

A. Well, in the meantime, Hal Flannery,

which I've got his phone in my pocket right

now, he was in the Justice Department. Of

course, he had been working with us on the

landowners' case.

I called him that Tuesday and told

him about Robert Powell had been there and I

was scared of him. See, when you buy from

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

152

groups, you begin to know who is who.

Q. Who has happened as a result of the

information that you gave the officials? Has

anything happened in succeeding years?

A. First of all, Dean Milk Company run

my mama down, caught her on the road, run

over the truck. After then they hired Marion

Yancy and Rue Grady hired the Andersons to

beat me up, beat me to death. And they give

a 1961 Pontiac and three hundred fifty

dollars to beat me to death.

They got out at the courthouse and

run me in Ms. Fair Theater's yard. That's

the person who owns the theaters in

Somerville now. They still own it. When we

was fighting in the yard, she come out there

with her gun, said, if you all don't quit

beating him, I'm going to kill you.

Q. John, were you put in the hospital as

a result of that?

A. Well, I come to my family doctor --

and I'd rather not discuss his name, because

something else I'm going to bring out, I

don't want any reprisals against him -- I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

153

come to my family doctor, and by my

grandparents on my daddy's side come up in

slavery, I learned a lot about nerve

doctors.

When you take mullet and boil it

down, which mullet has got a little stickers

on, it looks like a catfish, you can boil it

down and take Vaseline and make a salve and

take iodine salt and lay in it and draw a

sweat out. That's what I did. I come to the

doctor. They examined me and said I didn't

have no -- I didn't break no bones.

Q. John, I want to move along because of

the time constraints we have.

A. I understand.

Q. Were you ever asked to go to

Washington and testify before the House

Select Committee on Assassinations and tell

what you have told us here today?

A. Let me bring one other point up.

Q. John, no, stay, please, with me and

answer this question.

A. All right. Gene Johnson came down

investigating for the Select Committee. Me

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

154

and him went over all the records. I

discussed what I know, what I knew with him.

And when the time come for me to if

to Washington to testify before the Select

Committee, he come out there with the papers

for me to sign, and when he come out there

with the papers for me to sign, I noticed

that he had gotten a little hostile towards

me.

Somebody had got, in my opinion, to

him and changed his attitude. That's my

thinking. I signed the papers and got

everything ready. I says, John -- he says,

John, he says, I'll call you before you come

up and testify before the Select Committee.

And the Select Committee was going on.

Two to three days before I was

supposed to go, he called me up and said,

John, we don't need you.

Q. So the answer to the question is that

at the end of the day, you were not called to

testify before the Congressional committee?

A. I was not called.

Q. That's what you heard.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

155

MR. PEPPER: No further

questions.

THE COURT: Let's take about

fifteen minutes.

(Jury out.)

(Short recess.)

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: All right.

Mr. Garrison.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Mr. McFerren, you and I have talked

before about all of the things that you

know.

You knew Mr. Liberto quite a long

time, did you, Frank Liberto, over a period

of years?

A. I know him from 1960 up until 1996, I

was in his business once or twice a week.

Q. Okay. After the assassination of Dr.

King, did you ever see him anymore after

that?

A. I never did see him personally after

that.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

156

Q. Okay. And during the time that you

were around Mr. Liberto, Mr. McFerren, did

you ever hear him mention the name of Loyd

Jowers, ever hear him ever mention that name

to you?

A. Not to me.

Q. All right. Let me ask you this,

sir: After you saw Mr. Liberto when you

would go for your produce to buy it -- am I

correct, sir?

A. That's correct. Ninety percent of

the time he would be there, but sometimes

Latch would be there.

Q. All right, sir. You've lived in

Somerville many, many years, in the town of

Somerville, am I correct, sir?

A. I've been there all my life. The

only time I've been away is when I was in the

Army.

Q. Do you know Mr. Liberto visited

Somerville -- are you aware that he visited

Somerville on occasion?

A. He would -- I wouldn't say every

Saturday morning, but he would visit John

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

157

Wilder's office, which is on the east side of

the courthouse. Now, let me explain this to

you so you'll understand. When the

assassination committee of Dr. King was going

on in Washington, getting ready to go on, he

went to visiting John Wilder's office

regular.

Now, the way I got ahold of it, I

had some of our underground watching. Two to

three weeks before James Earl Ray broke pen

out of Brushy Mountain, I called Washington

and told the Select Committee that they was

going to kill James Earl Ray or something was

going to happen to him.

I talked to Mr. Gene Johnson, which

I've got his phone numbers, I've got

Mr. Flanders' phone numbers in my pocket now,

I've got Mr. Dole's phone numbers in my

pocket now. I was in correspondence with all

of them.

The Justice Department, what I said

before, the Justice Department covered it

up. When I said they covered up the

barnyard, I mean they covered it up. Now, if

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

158

you look at the records, the assistant to the

United States Attorney General at that time

was -- it was under the Nixon

administration. He had a heavy voice. I

talked to him one time. I says, I know Dr.

King's killings, who is in it, they trying to

set me up to get me killed. Mitchell, that

was his name. If you ever talked to him on

the phone, he has got a gross voice like a

bullfrog.

Q. All right. Let me ask you this,

Mr. McFerren: Since all this started and you

started the civil rights movement, have you

ever been shot?

A. I've been shot, I've been beat up

twice. The citizen council and the Klu Klux

Klan hired a man named Benefield, gave him

eighteen hundred dollars to kill me. He got

chicken and didn't kill me.

He sent word to me by Reverend Frank

Jones. He came to my brother's house. He

didn't even know which one of the houses I

stayed in. Myself, Reverend Frank Jones and

Mr. Benefield come down here on Vance. Our

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

159

lawyer's office was at 860 Vance Avenue.

That's Gerald Estes office on Vance.

He filed -- he made an affidavit

with the law and sent it to the Justice

Department that he was hired to kill me. It

hit on a dead ear. Nothing come about it.

MR. GARRISON: I appreciate it.

Thank you, sir.

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Is it true that almost thirty-one

years ago you told the same story that you

have told to this jury and this Court this

afternoon?

A. That's correct.

Q. And is that story true to the best of

your recollection and knowledge today as it

was then?

A. That's correct.

Q. And have you ever had an opportunity

to tell this story before in a court of law?

A. This is the first time.

MR. PEPPER: John, thank you

very much. No further questions.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

160

THE COURT: All right. You may

stand down, sir. You can remain in the court

room or you are free to leave.

THE WITNESS: Thank you.

(Witness excused.)

JAMES NATHAN WHITLOCK

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Would you state for the record,

please, your name and address.

A. My name is James Nathan Whitlock. I

don't want to give you my address to where

everybody can hear.

Q. That's all right. We will pass on

that.

A. Okay.

Q. Have you been a long-term resident of

Memphis?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And, Mr. Whitlock, what do you do for

a living?

A. I'm a taxi driver, professional

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

161

musician.

Q. And how long have you been a

professional musician?

A. For twenty-five years. Twenty-five

years.

Q. What instrument do you play?

A. I'm a guitar player

singer/song-writer.

Q. Have you played in areas other than

Memphis and Tennessee?

A. Yes, sir. I've played in Las Vegas,

Canada, California, the Bahamas, from one

point all the way -- just everywhere.

Q. So you've traveled a good deal?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Have you in the course of the time

you've been in Memphis, though, have you

received any commendations or any awards as a

result of civic activity?

A. Yes, sir, I have.

Q. Would you tell the Court and the jury

what those have been?

A. I received Tennessee's outstanding

achievement award from Governor McWhorter. I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

162

received the concern an Aide De Camp Award

from the other governor, the heavy-set guy.

I can't remember what his name is. I

received a commendation from the city from

Mayor Herenton, stuff from the senator,

letters from -- accommodating (sic) letters

from Vice-president Gore, another letter from

Jim Sasser, U.S. senator.

Q. Did any of these have to do with

saving an individual's life, one or other

persons' lives?

A. Yes, sir, they sure did.

Q. What were those occasions, those

incidents?

A. The first one was pertaining to a

passenger when I was driving a taxicab who

caught a cab up to the Sterick Building

downtown here and decided he was going to

jump off the roof and commit suicide.

A police officer -- I had radioed

for the police to come. It was on top of the

parking garage. The police officer came, and

there was a tussle involved, and they both

fell off the building and I climbed down the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

163

end of the building and pulled them both in.

That is the first time something like that --

I received some accommodation.

Then one of my neighbors was in a

fight and got his throat cut down the street

from where I lived, and I kept him from

bleeding to death. I captured his assailant,

too. So that was some more involved with

that.

Q. You've been in the right place at the

right time, or depending on how you look at

it, maybe the wrong place at the wrong time.

Did you in the course of your time here in

Memphis in your younger years back in the

1960's come to know a man named Frank

Liberto?

A. Not in the 1960's, no, sir.

Q. When did you come to know

Mr. Liberto?

A. In the late 1970's, approximately

1978, 1979 and 1980.

Q. So you knew him at the end of the

1970's, that's when you came to know him?

A. That's right, yes, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

164

Q. Would you describe to the Court and

the jury how you come to know him, what the

circumstances of your relationship were?

A. Mr. Frank and myself were friends.

He would come to my mother's restaurant on a

daily basis early in the morning and late in

the evening he'd come back. I spent most of

my time with him in the evening time.

Occasionally he would come there at

lunchtime.

We had a restaurant, an Italian

restaurant, a pizza restaurant, and he would

come and eat breakfast with my mother and

spend the rest the day with me occasionally.

Q. Was the restaurant located somewhere

between his work and his home?

A. Yes, sir, it was. It was located

approximately -- Mr. Frank's -- the Scott

Street Market was about a mile from my

restaurant. The way I understand it, he

lived off of Graham somewhere, and we were

kind of in between.

Q. He had a produce house at the

warehouse at the Scott Street Market?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

165

A. That's what I understand, yes, sir,

tomato house.

Q. Right. When he -- when you came to

know him, he would stop at the cafe, at your

mother's restaurant, and what would you talk

about? What was there between the two of you

that developed, this relationship?

A. Well, at the time I'd been performing

in Las Vegas, and Mr. Frank, he would come in

and drink beer a lot. I knew how to play a

song, an Italian song, on the guitar called

Malaguena. I used to play him this song. He

used to like what I would play him and he

would tip me money.

Then it got to where Mr. Frank

was -- I had a little small three-piece

combo, and he would book -- he would give me

jobs, such as that, performing. He liked for

me to play music. He would talk about the

old times and where he came from.

He would talk about my relationship

with my mother. I reminded himself of --

myself of him when he was young, how I

treated my mother and how we lived.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

166

Q. When he talked to you about the old

times or his earlier years, did he tell you

where he lived or -- what experiences did he

describe?

A. He called it the old country. I

remember playing him that song, he used to

lay his head back and would say, yeah, it is

just like I was in the old country, that's

the way they would play it, I like that

song.

That's the only mention of his

origin he ever -- where he came from he ever

made to me directly that wasn't pertaining to

the United States.

Q. Pertaining to the United States, did

he ever discuss any experiences or life when

in the City of New Orleans?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. What did he tell you about his life

there?

A. Well, I asked him some stuff that led

up to him telling me that he had come from

New Orleans, but I had heard that he was in

the Mafia. And I asked him if he was in the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

167

Mafia. And he didn't say yes or no. He

answered me by saying, I pushed a vegetable

cart in the French Quarter with Carlo

Marcello when I was a boy.

I didn't know what that meant. I

let that go. It went over my head. Years

later I saw the movie the assassination of

RFK or JFK with Oliver Stone, and Mr. Frank,

he talked Italian, and he said, I push a

vegetable cart with Carlo Marcello when I was

a boy. Carlo Marcello, I didn't know what

that meant. Then I saw that movie, and it

said Carlos Marcello, the kingpin of the

Mafia from New Orleans. I said, that's

Carlo, that's not Carlos, that's Carlo.

That's what threw the two together.

Q. So he confided or told you about his

earlier life experience with Carlos Marcello,

the New Orleans Mafia boss?

A. That's correct.

Q. But did you when you first met him

and you heard he was associated with the

Mafia, did you know what the Mafia was at

that point?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

168

A. No, sir. I asked Mr. Frank what it

was.

Q. What did he say?

A. I asked him, I said, what is the

Mafia? Is it a bunch of bad guys that sit

around and table and scheme up something mean

to do? He said, no, it is a bunch of

businessmen that take care of business.

Q. Now, did there come a time,

Mr. Whitlock, when you heard about a

conversation that Mr. Liberto had with your

mother?

A. Yes, sir. Pertaining to Martin

Luther King?

Q. Yes, sir. Pertaining to Martin

Luther King.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And did that conversation on the day

of the assassination of Martin Luther King

that he had with your mother, did that upset

you in some way?

A. Yes, it did, in a way it did.

Because that he would talk to my mother

directly about gangsterism, that is what I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

169

was predominantly upset about. It wasn't the

subject matter of what it was about, it was

the fact that he would think that he could,

you know, go to that level to talk to her

about that. That's what upset me more than

anything.

Q. When you heard about this, what did

you do?

A. I went directly to Mr. Frank about it

when he showed up at the pizza parlor and

just asked him, I said, hey, Mr. Frank, did

you kill Martin Luther King?

Q. Because what had you heard that he

had said to your mother?

A. He told mama that he had killed

Martin Luther King -- had Martin Luther King

killed. I didn't like him talking that to my

mother. I thought he was out of line for

coming forward with that, talking to her. He

could talk to me about it. But he stepped

over the line. So that's when I approached

him.

Q. You became offended and you actually

just went up to him and confronted him?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

170

A. That's right.

Q. How old were you at that point,

Mr. Whitlock?

A. Eighteen.

Q. As an eighteen-year-old young man,

you went up to this fairly formidable

individual, wasn't he?

A. Define "formidable."

Q. He was good sized, he had an aura of

power about him?

A. He was a big man, yes, sir.

Q. You confronted him by asking him the

question, did he kill Martin Luther King?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. What did he say to you?

A. He glared at me, he says, you've been

talking to your mother, hadn't you? I said,

yeah. He said, you wired? I didn't even

know what he meant by that. I went, no, I'm

not wired.

Q. He asked if you were wired, and you

didn't know what he meant by that?

A. I thought he was talking about -- I

thought he meant am I taking amphetamine

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

171

pills and wired up. I said, no, I'm not

crazy. He sat there for a second.

He says --

THE WITNESS: Your Honor, I

don't want to offend anybody, and I don't

know how many people are watching this

television, but I'm going to have to use

some --

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Just speak clearly

and plainly, just what he said.

A. I'm going to use that N word nobody

wants to hear. I don't want to offend

anybody by saying this.

Q. Mr. Whitlock, just say what you know.

A. He told me, he said, I didn't kill

the nigger, but I had it done. I said, what

about that other son-of-a-bitch up there

taking credit for it? He says, ahh, he

wasn't nothing but a troublemaker from

Missouri, he was a front man.

I didn't know what that meant.

Because "front man" to me means something

different than what he was thinking about. I

said, a what? He said, a setup man. I said,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

172

well, why did you kill the preacher for? He

says, ahh, it was about the draft.

He says, boy, you don't even need to

be hearing about this. He said, don't you

say nothing. He stood up and he acted like

he was going to slap me up upside the head.

So I stood up there. Me and him are looking

at each other. He has got this glare look on

his eye. I could tell he was thinking about

hitting me.

It run through my head, you old

son-of-a-bitch, you hit me, I'm going to

knock a knot upside your head, I don't care

who you are. He is standing there glaring at

me.

He says, you fixing to go to Canada,

aren't you? I said, yeah. Then about that

time the phone rang. I just walked over

there and answered the phone and was busy

with the pizza stuff, I looked up, and he is

gone. He left his beer sitting there on the

table. It was about half full.

Q. Did you ever have any other

discussion with him about this matter?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

173

A. No, sir.

Q. And do you recall what year this was?

A. 1979.

Q. 1979?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. You went off to Canada, then?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Played your gig?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. Did you ever see or talk to

Mr. Liberto again?

A. My time frame -- he called me, okay,

on the phone, right after that, and he says,

Nate, I've got a job for you. I went, oh,

man, he is going to want me to -- well, let

me back up just a little bit here.

Mr. Frank -- there was something

that happened over at the pizza parlor prior

to this conversation I had with him about him

having Martin Luther King whacked. Something

took place right prior to that at the pizza

parlor that left him open to talk to me in

these kinds of ways.

It was a pretty nasty situation, but

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

174

I had to do what I had to do over there. I

don't tell everybody what I did. About a

week or two prior to this conversation I had

with Mr. Frank, some guy came in, he looked

kind of like John Wayne. He was a big guy, a

redneck guy, walked in my mother's restaurant

drinking a beer.

Mama runs over there to the door and

she says, you can't bring a beer in here but

I'll sell you one. He just -- once again,

I'm going to have to use some nasty language

to make it how it was. He says, I just might

buy this mother-fucking place, and he

back-handed my mama.

When he did, I walked around from

the counter with a nightstick and knocked

fire from his tail end and knocked him

through the front door, hit him across here

and busted his eye open real bad, busted his

head open, knocked him out on the front

doorstep out there and whacked him again with

that stick.

There was a man that was working out

there named Louis Bonsella. He come running

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

175

out there and said, don't hit him no more,

Nate, you are going to kill him. I said, I'm

trying to kill this MF. Some other guy come

running out the door and says, oh, wait a

minute, come on, Red, talking about the guy I

hit with the stick, come on, Red, they are

going to kill us. So I hit him in the GP.

So the last I saw these two

knuckle-heads, they were dragging each other

down the sidewalk. Meanwhile, Mr. Frank had

got me up in a truck a couple days later, he

got me up in there. Mama called the cops.

They come over there. She filed a report on

the guy causing such a disturbance.

The lieutenant shows up over there.

He gets me out on there on the sidewalk and

says, Nate, you are going to have to watch

yourself because there is going to start a

war over here. I whacked this guy good with

that stick.

Mr. Frank got me in the truck. He

started asking me about this fight. He says,

were you going to kill him, Nate? I said,

yeah, I was, but Louis stopped me. He said,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

176

who? He said, the guy over there working at

the place. He said, oh, that old dago

son-of-a-bitch.

Then he says, well, it is a good

thing you didn't kill him, you would have

been in a whole lot of trouble if you would

have. You got out of it, but I would have

helped your mama. He said, could you do it

again? I said, I guess so, if somebody come

up in the pizza parlor acting the fool and

hit mama, I said, yeah, I'll tear them up.

He says, no, would you do it just in

general? I said, to who? He said, mostly

dope niggers over there on around Hollywood,

going up around the Hollywood over Plough

Boulevard. He motioned over there towards

Hollywood.

I said, I don't know. He said,

could you do it for some money? I said how

much money? He said, five or ten, it

depends. I said, who is it? He says, these

dope boys get these white girls over there,

the families still care something about them,

either the police can't or won't do anything

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

177

about it and he said that's it, that's who we

want to get right there.

I said, who exactly is it? He said,

there is always some nigger around here needs

to be killed. I don't know. I'll let you

know.

Well, when he called my back after

we had this conversation about Martin Luther

King, he told me about that, he said, oh,

I've got a job for you, Nate. Oh, God, he is

going to want me to kill some dope idiot over

here somewhere.

He says, get your nigger. I had a

guy, a black man, that played drums for me,

and another man. He says meet Billy down at

the Cook Convention Center. He was talking

about a music job.

Q. It wasn't a contract to kill

somebody?

A. Yeah. He wanted me to play for

Sheriff Bill Morris' Christmas party. I was

to go down there to the Cook Convention

Center, play this Christmas party and I get

paid a check. Then he shows back up over

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

178

there at the pizza parlor. That's what the

conversation was about.

Q. Did there come a time years later

when you wrote a letter to a government

official in which you discussed or in which

you stated what you have told this Court and

jury today?

A. I didn't go into detail, but I had

written the governor of Tennessee with a copy

written to John Wilder, the lieutenant

governor, and to the -- I sent one to the

person at the Board of Responsibility and to

another Memphis attorney, yes, sir, I did.

Q. And were there any repercussions on

you as a result of that letter and what you

said about this case?

A. Yes, sir, it was.

Q. What happened you to?

A. Well, I started having this guy

follow me around in a car that was undercover

car that had a bunch of antennas on it. I

was working my taxicab. He was constantly

following me for about two days.

Then I got down here at Poplar and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

179

Cleveland and I called my mother-in-law,

ex-mother-in-law up on the phone in Shelby

Forrest, and I had a bunch of cops roll down

on me, a bunch of police. I said, heck,

there is a robbery somewhere, I better get

out of here. I hung up the phone and took

off.

I didn't know they was there for

me. I get around the corner and I'm pulled

over. I had three squad cars with loads of

police with guns to my head. They hit me in

the groin twice, smashed my face up against

the back of the car, stretched me out.

One of them cops -- I used to

wrestle a couple years ago at the Coliseum,

and one of the cops recognized me from when I

wrestling. He said, wait a minute, this is

Nate. They was working on the hood smashing

my face down in that thing, you know. I was

just taking it. They didn't put anything on

me that I hadn't hardly had before.

So I'm just taking it however I can

take it. But the one cop stopped it. The

guy had a gun to my head while the other one

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

180

was working on me. He said, wait a minute,

Nate, what is this about? I said, I don't

know, man, I guess it is my ex-wife or

something. I didn't know what it was about.

Q. You didn't put it together at that

point?

A. Not at that moment, no, I didn't.

The top cop that knew me, he put me in his

squad car and looks back at me, he said,

Nate, have you been making phone calls to

Nashville? I said, ug-huh, not me.

They jerked me out of the car

again. They said, how much change you got on

you? I had like eighty cents in change.

They are all looking like he ain't got enough

money to make a long-distance phone call. I

said, what are you talking about? He says --

the cop asked me, he says, do you -- have you

been making bomb threats? I said, I can't

even set my VCR much less make a bomb. I

don't know what you are talking about. This

is the cop I know.

He says, have you been trying to

embezzle money out of anybody, some

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

181

government guy? I said, no, ma'am, what the

heck is this? Then all of a sudden this guy

that has been following me, he pulls up there

real quick in this unmarked car, because they

are on the radio saying -- I said, if this is

all what is going on, you've got the wrong

guy, you need to go back over there wherever

he is on the phone and see if you can find

him, because you've got the wrong person

here.

Well, when that took place, the cop

that put all the regular Memphis police on

me, the undercover guy, he come wheeling up

and blocks his face so he can't see me and

walks by the car and said, here is the number

he is calling. I'm listening out the window

to them. I call him a lying SOB when he

walks by the door because that's what he was

was. I ain't called anybody in Nashville.

Q. Well, the upshot of it all was that

this was serious harassment that happened you

to?

A. That's an understatement. Then they

got me downtown, read me my Miranda rights.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

182

I said, am I under arrest? He said, boy, you

in a lot of trouble. He said, you can't get

no lawyer, you can't get no bond. He said,

why does the Secret Service have a hold on a

cab driver?

This is that cop up there named

Johnstone, eleventh floor, bomb unit. I

says, I can't tell you. He said, well, you

going to have to tell me. I said, I'll talk

to the AG about it because he told me not to

say a word to nobody about this.

He said, you ain't talking to nobody

until you tell me why the Secret Service has

ahold on this cab driver right here. I said,

okay if you really want to know it, I'll give

it you. There are entities within the

government -- he is taking a statement. They

give my give me my Miranda rights. I'm not

sure if I'm under arrest or not. Then I give

the statement. You can't make a statement

unless I done read you your rights, he said.

I said, fine. Okay. I guess I was

arrested.

I give the statement. I said, the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

183

reason why they doing this to me is there are

entities within the United States government

that don't want me to say what I know about

the assassination of Martin Luther King. He

almost fainted. He walked out of the room.

I saw him through the window. He

was on the FAX machine and he was working the

FAX machine. I read the heading of the paper

he had. It had something on there that said

Washington. He walks back in there with the

FAX. Him and Larkin, the other major up

there, they read it, and they said, get the

hell out of here.

I was arrested with guns to my head,

hit in the groin, read my Miranda, then

un-arrested and kicked loose all at the same

time.

Q. My goodness. Nate, thanks very much

for coming down here this afternoon.

MR. PEPPER: No further

questions.

THE WITNESS: Dr. Pepper, you

don't have to thank me for telling the truth.

MR. PEPPER: No further

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

184

questions.

THE COURT: Mr. Garrison might

have some questions for you, sir.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Mr. Whitlock, I've known you and your

family for quite a few years, haven't I?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Let me ask you this: How long have

you known Mr. Loyd Jowers seated over here?

A. Since 1985, Mr. Garrison.

Q. You worked when he was in the cab

business, did you?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. You've been around him quite a bit?

A. Not in the last ten years I haven't,

no, sir.

Q. You'd been around him quite a bit

before then?

A. A long time ago, yes, sir.

Q. Has he ever made any mention to you

about the assassination of Dr. King?

A. No, sir.

Q. He never said any word about that?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

185

A. I never drew the two together until I

saw Mr. Jowers and yourself and Mr. Akins on

one of them television programs. I called

mama up on the phone. I said, does that

sound familiar?

MR. GARRISON: That's all I

have.

THE COURT: All right. You may

step down.

(Witness excused.)

THOMAS H. SMITH

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Captain Smith, good afternoon.

A. Hi.

Q. Thank you for coming here this

afternoon.

A. You are welcome.

Q. Would you state for the record,

please, your name and address?

A. Thomas H. Smith, 2997 Knight Road,

Memphis, Tennessee.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

186

Q. Captain Smith, were you employed by

the Memphis Police Department?

A. No longer. I've been retired for

eleven years now.

Q. How long did you work for the Memphis

Police Department?

A. Thirty-three years.

Q. What was the rank that you achieved?

A. Well, at one time I was captain in

charge of homicide.

Q. Were you assigned to homicide at the

time of the assassination of Martin Luther

King?

A. Yes, sir, I was. I was assigned to

homicide in 1960.

Q. So in 1968 you were a homicide

detective involved in that investigation?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. In the course of that investigation

did you first of all arrive on the scene

around the time of the killing?

A. Yes, sir. My partner and I, Roy

Davis, were the first ones on the scene at

the time of the killing.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

187

Q. At some point in time did you go over

and into the rooming house on the opposite

side of Mulberry?

A. Yes, sir, I did, during the time of

my investigation after I did what I had to do

at the scene. I was going around looking for

witnesses and went over to the rooming house.

Q. Did you go up to the second floor of

that rooming house and into a room occupied

by a man called Charles Stephens?

A. Yes, sir, I did.

Q. And his common-law wife Grace

Stephens?

A. Grace, yes.

Q. How long after the killing did you go

into that room and see Mr. Stephens?

A. Well, it couldn't have been all that

long, because we tried to expedite matters.

It was still daylight. I talked to

Mr. Stephens. I could not talk to Grace.

Q. You could not talk to Mr. Stephens?

A. No.

Q. Why couldn't you speak with

Mr. Stephens?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

188

A. She is drunk, passed out on the bed.

Q. He was drunk and passed out?

A. Yes, sir.

THE COURT: He said "she" was.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) I'm sorry, Mrs.

Stephens was drunk and passed out. What

about Mr. Stephens?

A. He had been drinking heavily.

Q. Did you talk to him?

A. He was leaning up against the door

and talked with me briefly, yes, sir.

Q. And what kind of condition was he in?

A. He was also intoxicated but not as

bad as Grace.

Q. Were you aware of the fact that

Mr. Stephens gave a statement that was used

in the extradition proceedings from London

against James Earl Ray?

A. I wasn't for a long time. I know he

was.

Q. And that as a result of Mr. Stephens'

identification of a profile in the distance

that he saw, Mr. Ray was extradited from

London and brought back to the United States.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

189

A. Yes, sir.

Q. In your opinion at the time when you

interviewed him, within minutes of the

killing, after the killing, would he have

been capable of making that kind of

identification?

A. No, sir. No way.

Q. Because of his intoxication?

A. No, sir. I don't think he could. I

didn't think enough of his statement that I

took to take him downstairs, downtown and

take a formal statement from him and so put

it in my arrest report that he was

intoxicated to the point there was no sense

in bringing him downtown.

Q. You put that in your report?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Was that report ever reflected in the

Memphis Police Department investigation

report?

A. Yes, sir. It is quite full of the

investigation. We all wrote our little part

that we had in it.

Q. But did you read the official MPD

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

190

report and did you ever see the comments that

you have made just now included in that

report?

A. No, sir. I have never read the

report. I never had my hands on it. Well, I

did have my hands on, it but I never had time

to read it. When I was promoted in charge of

the homicide squad, there was a report in the

office, and I took it out of the desk -- out

of the file and put it in my desk drawer

where I could securely lock it up.

Q. All right.

A. And it was later taken from me by

Chief John Moore. He called me one day and

asked me if I had it. I said yes, I did. He

said, bring it to me. I carried it down

there. I haven't seen it since.

Q. Do you know what happened to it?

A. No, sir.

Q. One final line of questioning. Were

you over in the hospital at the time when the

body of Martin Luther King was present in a

morgue room?

A. Yes, sir, I was there.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

191

Q. And did you put your hand on the back

of Dr. King under his lower left shoulder

blade and feel an object?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. What was the object that you felt

just beneath the skin?

A. Well, it felt just like a bullet to

me, the lead jacket of a bullet.

Q. Did it feel as though it was one

piece?

A. Yes, sir, it was still round.

Q. It felt as though it was one piece?

A. Yes, sir.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further,

Your Honor.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, I

have no questions. Thank you, sir.

THE COURT: All right. Thank

you very much, Captain.

(Witness excused).

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiffs have another witness who has made

a special trip here. The entire testimony

will not take more than about seven to ten

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

192

minutes.

THE COURT: We'll hear it.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you.

MR. PEPPER: Call Mr. Charles

Hurley, please.

THE COURT: Ladies and

gentlemen, let me probably admonish you. You

probably have heard some things you have

never heard before about this case. You are

not to discuss this evidence, not with your

family, not among yourselves or anyone else.

CHARLES HURLEY

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Hurley. It has

been awhile.

A. It has.

Q. Would you please state your name and

address for the record, please.

A. Charles Hurley, 2595 Cedar Ridge

Drive, Germantown, Tennessee.

Q. Mr. Hurley, what do you do for a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

193

living?

A. I'm division manager for Save-a-lot

Food Stores.

Q. How long have you held that position?

A. That position, about four years.

THE COURT: H U R L E Y?

THE WITNESS: Yes, Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right. Go

ahead.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) At the outset let me

thank you very much for coming down here at

considerable inconvenience to yourself.

Mr. Hurley, what position did you

hold -- what was your work back in 1968?

A. I was advertising manager for

National Food Stores in Memphis.

Q. What did your wife do at that time?

A. She worked for the Seabrook Paint

Company. She was a buyer at Seabrook Paint

Company down on South Main Street.

Q. Physically where was the Seabrook

Paint Company located in respect of the

rooming house?

A. It would be immediately across the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

194

street, virtually right across the street.

Q. Virtually opposite the rooming house

in question?

A. Right, uh-huh.

Q. And therefore virtually opposite

Jim's Grill, the restaurant at the bottom of

the rooming house?

A. Yes, I believe that would be correct.

Q. What was your practice on a usual day

when you finished work?

A. Well, what I would do is I would go

downtown and pick up my wife. I worked down

on South Florida Street, which is not really

very far from there, and we had one car at

the time, so that's what our usual practice

was to do.

Q. On the 4th of April, 1968, Thursday

afternoon, did you go downtown to pick up

your wife?

A. I believe, yes.

Q. Do you recall what time of day that

was?

A. I normally got off about

four-thirty. It is probably fifteen or

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

195

twenty minutes to where she was. I would

just normally drive down and pick her up.

Q. And so around a quarter to five --

A. About that, I would say.

Q. -- ten to five, you drove to South

Main Street?

A. Yes.

Q. And you were facing north as you go?

A. I would be facing north, yes.

Q. And would you pull over to the side

of --

A. Yes. I would -- if she wasn't

downstairs, I would pull over and park.

Q. Was she downstairs on that day?

A. I believe she had come down and I was

not downtown, so she had gone back up to her

work space.

Q. So when you arrived, she wasn't down

there?

A. No, she wasn't down there.

Q. What did you do?

A. I just sat in the car and waited for

her.

Q. Where did you park your car?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

196

A. I parked, you know, facing north.

That would be the east side of South Main

right there almost opposite the rooming

house.

Q. Was there an automobile parked

immediately in front of you?

A. Yes, there was.

Q. And what kind of car was parked

immediately in front of you?

A. It was a white Mustang.

Q. It was a white Mustang?

A. Yes.

Q. How far back, can you estimate, was

that Mustang from Jim's Grill or the rooming

house?

A. It was right there. That has been a

long time.

Q. Sure.

A. But it was right there.

Q. Did you notice the license plates on

that white Mustang?

A. Yes, I did. Yes, I did.

Q. What kind of license plates were

there on that white Mustang?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

197

A. As I recall at the time and still

believe, it was an Arkansas license plate,

because the numerals were red and the

background was white.

Q. Do you believe the license plate on

that car was a white Mustang?

A. Yes, I am.

Q. Are you aware of the fact that James

Earl Ray was driving a white Mustang in

Memphis on that day?

A. I've heard that subsequently, yes.

Q. Are you aware of the registration of

that Mustang that James Earl Ray was driving?

A. You know, only what I've been told or

heard subsequently. I think it was the FBI

or someone had told me it was an Alabama

license, they believed it to be an Alabama

license.

Q. He was driving an Alabama

license-plate-registered car. You saw a

white Mustang with Arkansas plates?

A. I believe them to be Arkansas plates.

Q. On that street?

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

198

Q. Was there anyone sitting in that car?

A. There was one person sitting in the

car.

Q. When your wife came down and you

picked her up and you drove away, was that

person still sitting in that car?

A. Yes, uh-huh.

Q. Could you describe that person?

A. The only thing I could see was the

back of someone's head sitting in the car. I

couldn't identify him from that, I'm sure.

MR. PEPPER: That's fine. Thank

you very much, Mr. Hurley. Nothing further.

MR. GARRISON: I have no

questions of Mr. Hurley, thank you.

THE COURT: All right, sir. You

may stand down. You are free to leave.

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: Any more

out-of-towners?

MR. PEPPER: Well, we do have on

call outside two more witnesses whose

testimony will be very brief. We can have

them return, if Your Honor wishes, tomorrow

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

199

to begin in the morning. One has come from

Florida, but he is prepared to stay over. It

is at Your Honor's discretion, whatever you

wish.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, his

testimony may not be quite as brief. I will

have some cross-examination on him.

THE COURT: Very well. You've

answered the question I might have asked.

Ladies and gentlemen, we're going to

stop at this point. We will resume tomorrow

at ten o'clock. Again, please don't discuss

the testimony with anyone.

That also goes for the witnesses who

have testified here. You are not to discuss

your testimony on the stand here with any of

the reporters or anyone else.

All right.

(Jury out.)

(The proceedings were adjourned

at 4:30 p.m.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

200

IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF SHELBY COUNTY,

TENNESSEE FOR THE THIRTIETH JUDICIAL

DISTRICT AT MEMPHIS

_______________________________________________

CORETTA SCOTT KING, et al,

Plaintiffs,

Vs. Case No. 97242

LOYD JOWERS, et al,

Defendants.

_______________________________________________

PROCEEDINGS

November 17th, 1999

VOLUME III

_______________________________________________

Before the Honorable James E. Swearengen,

Division 4, judge presiding.

_______________________________________________

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI,

RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

COURT REPORTERS

Suite 2200, One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

(901) 529-1999

201

- APPEARANCES -

For the Plaintiff: DR. WILLIAM PEPPER

Attorney at Law

New York City, New York

For the Defendant:

MR. LEWIS GARRISON

Attorney at Law

Memphis, Tennessee

Court Reported by:

MR. BRIAN F. DOMINSKI

Certificate of Merit

Registered Professional

Reporter

Daniel, Dillinger,

Dominski, Richberger &

Weatherford

22nd Floor

One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

202

- INDEX -

WITNESS: PAGE/LINE NUMBER

JAMES MILNER

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 204 21

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:..................... 224 5

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 227 22

FLOYD NEWSOM

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 230 16

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:..................... 240 9

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 242 16

NORVILLE WALLACE

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 245 12

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:..................... 254 15

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 257 16

LEON COHEN

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 260 23

ED REDDITT

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER: ...................... 293 12

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON...................... 310 10

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 313 14

JAMES McCRAW

BY DEPOSITION........................ 271 15

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

203

JERRY WILLIAMS

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER: ...................... 315 15

SOLOMON JONES

BY WRITTEN STATEMENT(S).............. 327 13

PHILLIP MELANSON

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER: ...................... 338 13

KAYE PITTMAN BLACK

BY PRIOR TRANSCRIBED TESTIMONY....... 348 10

EXHIBIT PAGE/LINE

Exhibit 1............................ 269 22

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

204

PROCEEDINGS

(November 17, 1999, 10:20 a.m.)

THE COURT: All right. Bring

the jury out, please.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: Good morning, ladies

and gentlemen. We're going to resume our

trial at this time.

Mr. Pepper, will you call your next

witness.

MR. PEPPER: Good morning, Your

Honor.

THE COURT: Good morning.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiffs call as their first witness this

morning Mr. James Milner.

JAMES E. MILNER

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good morning, Mr. Milner. Thank you

for coming here this morning. I know you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

205

have a bit of a hearing problem.

A. Right.

Q. If you can't hear me, would you ask

me to come forward to speak louder.

A. Please, just come forward.

Q. All right.

MR. PEPPER: Is it all right to

approach, Your Honor?

THE COURT: You may.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Would you state your

name and address for the record, please.

A. My name is James Edward Milner, Jr.

I live in St. Petersburg, Florida.

Q. Where did you live before you resided

in St. Petersburg, Florida?

A. Here in Memphis, Tennessee.

Q. What do you presently do for a

living?

A. I drive a taxicab.

Q. And what did you do in Memphis,

Tennessee, for a living?

A. Drove a taxi.

Q. How long did you drive a taxicab?

A. Approximately around about

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

206

twenty-five years.

Q. Always in Memphis, Tennessee?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Which company did you drive for?

A. I drove for Veteran Cab and Yellow

Cab.

Q. How many years for Veteran's Cab?

A. Eighteen of it was Yellow. The rest

of it was Veteran?

Q. In which order, Yellow first?

A. The Veteran first and then Yellow.

Q. Then Yellow. In the course of your

work in your taxi-driving work here in the

City of Memphis, did you come to know the

Defendant Loyd Jowers?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. When did you first meet Mr. Jowers?

A. The first time I met him was back

there after I first started driving, back

when he was with Yellow Cab. I'm not sure

exactly what year it was.

Q. But approximately.

A. I probably met Loyd probably I'd say

after I'd been driving about two years or

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

207

something like that.

Q. About two years you had been driving

and you met him. Did you come to know him

pretty well?

A. Well, I didn't really come to know

him real well until I went to work for

Veteran Cab when he bought the company out.

Q. So when he owned Veterans Cab, when

he bought that company and you drove for him,

then you came to know him better?

A. Right.

Q. Roughly what time frame is that?

What years would those be?

A. I'm not really sure the year, but it

was right around 1979, 1980, something like

that, as far as I can remember, something

like that. I'm not for sure of the dates.

They pass off too fast for me.

Q. How often did you see Mr. Jowers

during that period?

A. I'd see him every day. I was a

supervisor down there. I helped run a lot of

things down there. I'd see him every day.

Q. In the course of your days work, how

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

208

much time would you say you actually spent

with him?

A. Oh, I'd say anywhere from at least

eight hours a day. Maybe even ten hours a

day. Loyd sometimes would stay down there

five, six o'clock, something. I'd get down

there usually about seven o'clock in the

morning.

Q. All right. So you had extensive

contact with him?

A. Right.

Q. How many days a week would that be?

A. Well, I don't really remember if he

took off on weekends or not. I know it was

at least Monday through Friday and some

Saturdays. I can't really remember if I

worked six days a week or seven days or

what. I worked quite a few days a week.

Q. Okay. So you had this contact with

Mr. Jowers over a period of time about twenty

years ago?

A. Right.

Q. Now, in the course of this quite

extensive contact with him, did you ever

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

209

discuss the assassination of Martin Luther

King with him?

A. Yes. It was one day they was having

a -- I believe it was some kind of a march

downtown about it. I don't know if it was on

the anniversary of his death. I'm not sure

just the circumstances of what was going on

downtown. There was talk about James Earl

Ray in the paper and on the news and

everything. We just got to talking one day

down there.

It was just me and him in the office

there. I told him, I says, you know, I just

don't think James Earl Ray done it. Loyd

made a comment, you know, he said, no, Lordy,

Memphis police officers. Well, he said law

enforcement officers done it. He said, you

can take that to the bank.

Q. I'm sorry. Would you repeat that?

A. He said, you can take that to the

bank, you can bank on that or something.

Loyd used to have some phrases when he used

to talk. He'd always say, you can take that

to the bank, you know.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

210

Q. What was he saying you could take to

the bank?

A. The truth of what he was saying,

anything he would say, you know, in other

words like money, if he give you money, you

could take it to the bank. If he told you

something, he would guarantee it would be

true. He never --

Q. What was the specific statement he

was referring to in your mind?

A. When he was talking about Ray doing

the killing, he mentioned, no -- I think he

said something he didn't think he done it or

he didn't do it, you know. He said, a law

enforcement officer done that, you can take

that to the bank.

Q. He said a law enforcement officer did

it, you can take that to the bank?

A. Sir?

Q. He said a law enforcement officer did

it?

A. He said law enforcement officers.

Q. Did he say what agency this law

enforcement officer might have worked for?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

211

A. I'm not sure if he said Memphis

police department or what. I can't be for

sure about that. It has been so many years

ago now, I don't remember a whole lot about

that conversation. We was just talking about

different things, you know. He did say law

enforcement officers.

Q. That's fair enough, Mr. Milner. You

just must tell the Court and the jury what

you honestly remember at this point in time

these years later. Did he say anything about

the planning of the assassination?

A. No, sir.

Q. Did he say anything about the

involvement of anyone else in the

assassination?

A. No, sir.

Q. Just that one statement?

A. Just that one statement.

Q. Did you ever at any other time

discuss this matter with him?

A. Yes. I heard through the news media

and stuff like that that Loyd was trying to

come out about the truth about the killing.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

212

But I didn't know the circumstances about it

or anything. So I didn't know who he talked

to about it.

So I talked to a lawyer up in

Tennessee that was representing James Earl

Ray. He contacted me, had me talk to

Mr. Billings, a private investigator here.

He told me about Loyd's lawyer. He told me I

needed to go up there and talk to him. So I

said, okay. He had a Mr. Hamblin went up

there and talk to me.

Q. I want to stop you there, because the

question was did you have any further

conversations with Mr. Jowers, not the

history of your --

A. Yes.

Q. You had a further conversation with

Mr. Jowers?

A. Right. After that.

Q. When did that conversation take

place?

A. That was in April -- I believe it was

April the 2nd of last year, 2nd of last year,

1998.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

213

Q. Where did that conversation take

place?

A. Right here in Memphis. He was in

Arkansas at the time. He called me on the

phone. I left word through his attorney to

call me because I wanted to talk to him.

Q. So he called you?

A. Right.

Q. You spoke with him at that time?

A. Right.

Q. What did he say to you at that time?

A. Well, we just made a little bit of

conversation about we hadn't seen each other

in quite awhile, you know. I was asking him

what was going on with him and the King

killing. He told me, you know, that he was

trying to bring it out but he didn't know how

to bring it out.

I remembered the conversation back

we had before, and I heard rumors through the

cab drivers, you know, how a lot of cab

drivers would talk, that had heard a lot of

things, you know. I heard that Loyd was

involved in it but I didn't know if that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

214

would be -- just to be sure. Different

things like that. I just asked him, I said,

listen, what's your involvement in it?

That's when he told me.

Q. What did he tell you?

A. He told me he was involved in it to a

certain extent. I asked him, I says, first

thing I asked him, I said, listen, you tell

me the honest truth. He has always been

truthful with me. I said, listen, did you --

first thing I asked him, did you pull the

trigger? He said, no, no, Lordy. He said, I

was involved in it to a certain extent, but

did I not pull the trigger.

I said, well, that's the main thing

I was concerned about. I didn't want nobody

talking to me about killing somebody, you

know what I mean. So we talked over two, two

and a half, three months there just talked

every day.

I'd call him on my cell phone. We

would talk and he would tell me things that

happened to him because he said he would like

to bring it out, you know, but he didn't want

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

215

to take the chance of maybe being indicted

for something, being involved in it to a

certain extent, or what. So he just come out

and just told me basically the whole story

about it.

Q. Well, how did these new admissions

differ from what he had told you almost

twenty years ago?

A. How much difference?

Q. Yes.

A. Well, he just told me more or less

not every little detail, but he just told me

exactly how it come about, who was involved

in it.

Q. Let me stop you, Mr. Milner. How did

it come about? How did you come to

understand that it came about?

A. He said he was offered I think it was

a hundred thousand dollars or something by

Frank Liberto had offered him the money if he

thought he could find somebody to do a

killing.

He didn't know what kind of a

killing it was at the time or nothing. He

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

216

says, I don't know. Then Loyd just said he

didn't think no more about it until Frank

Liberto called him, and he said, I'm sending

a great deal of money. In other words, Loyd

would buy his produce from this Frank

Liberto, and I think they was real close

friends.

He said, I'm sending a great deal of

money. It would be wrapped up. He said it

was wrapped up in a paper sack with two

rubber bands on it. He said, I'll be sending

it inside the produce, up under his produce

that he was sending to him.

Loyd said on the day he said he

would send it, that he received the money. I

think he said he stuck the money inside of a

stove, an old stove he had there. He was

told that somebody would come back and get

the money.

Q. So he was given this money to hold

for someone else to pick up?

A. Right. At the time, from what I

understand, he didn't know what the money was

about or what it was for or nothing. He just

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

217

said, I'm sending you some money there, be

careful, it is a great deal of money, just

hold it for me and somebody will be there to

come and get it.

Q. Then what happened?

A. Well, he said this -- I'm not sure

how to pronounce his name -- Raul come and

picked the money up. We got to talk. I

said, how did you know of anything about the

killing if you didn't know about the money?

He said, well, over a couple of days

some law enforcement officers that he knew

real well, one of them was his partner back

years ago when he was on the police

department, he said him and two other law

enforcement officers planned this thing out

over two days.

He said he didn't know what -- he

said he knew they was planning -- what he

could understand, they was planning to kill

someone, but he didn't know who or what it

was about or nothing. He just assumed it was

something of that nature. He told me that --

do I have to tell their names?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

218

Q. Mr. Milner, let me -- it is useful if

you tell any names that you know. But let me

back you up. Where did this planning take

place?

A. In his cafe. He owned -- he had a

cafe down below the boarding house, across

the street from the Lorraine Hotel.

Q. In Jim's Grill?

A. Sir?

Q. In his cafe, Jim's Grill?

A. Right, Jim's Grill.

Q. Who did he say was involved in the

planning of this assassination?

A. He said there was five men that

planned it out. Two of them he didn't know

who they were. But he knew three of them.

One of them was a good hunting buddy of his

that he hunted with all the time. The other

one was a law enforcement officer that he

used to ride with years ago when he was on

the police department. The third one was a

guy that this man, this officer that he used

to ride with, brought in to introduce Loyd.

He brought him in there and introduced him to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

219

him. That's how Loyd knew about the third

one. He didn't know him personally.

Q. He didn't know the third one

personally?

A. Right.

Q. Who was the one he did not know

personally?

A. Who was he? He said he was a law

enforcement officer by the name of Merrell

McCullough.

Q. Merrell McCullough?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. Who were the officer he knew

personally?

A. The officer's -- I think his name

was -- I believe he was a supervisor by the

name of Johnny Barger. That was his partner

that he used to ride with years ago. And the

second one was Earl Clark. That's the one he

used to hunt with down in Mississippi.

Q. I see. Did he say how long these

planning sessions lasted?

A. He just said over a couple of days

before the killing, but he didn't say how

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

220

long, how long a stint of time or anything

like that. If he did, I don't remember what

he said.

Q. Did he say what his role was in terms

of the actual killing? What Loyd's role

was?

A. At the time he wasn't involved in it

at all. He was overhearing what they was

talking about. He said -- he was told at six

o'clock the day of the killing by Frank

Liberto, who called him, he said to be at the

back door at six o'clock and receive a

package for him. He didn't say what it was

going to be or nothing else. Loyd said he

didn't have no idea what it was. He was just

told to be at the back door.

Q. Be at the back door of his cafe, his

grill?

A. His cafe.

Q. Which faced on toward the Lorraine

Motel?

A. Yes.

Q. Was he at the back door?

A. He said at six o'clock he went to the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

221

back door, you know, and was just standing

there. All of a sudden he heard a big bang.

He said when he opened the door right away

when he heard it, because he -- he said as

soon as he opened the door, one of the

officers handed him a rifle. It was still

smoking from the barrel.

Q. Which officer handed him the rifle?

A. Sir?

Q. Did he say officer handed him the

rifle?

A. He said it was Earl Clark.

Q. What did he do with the rifle?

A. Loyd said he brought the rifle in. I

believe he said he broke the rifle down, took

the shell casing out of it. He said he tried

to flush it down the commode and it stopped

his commode up to where the commode wouldn't

flush.

So he said he had to tear his

commode down to get the shell casing out of

it. So he put the rifle I think under a

cupboard. He wrapped it up I think he said

in something and put it under the shelf or

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

222

something.

I not sure where he said he put it,

but it was somewhere back in the kitchen. He

said later on that night after he closed the

grill down, he throwed the shell casing away

in the Mississippi River.

Q. Did he say what was done with the

actual murder weapon?

A. He said the next day that this Raul

came to pick the rifle up. He said that was

the last he seen of Raul or the rifle. I've

asked him what he thought happened to it. He

said he didn't have no idea what happened to

it. He didn't want to know where it was at.

Q. All right.

A. He said until all this was over with,

he found out that Mr. King had been killed,

he didn't even know, you know, who they was

trying to kill or anything, you know. He

didn't have no idea who it was.

Q. Mr. Milner, Mr. Jowers opened this

page with you, this story with you, some

twenty years ago. Is that right? He

started --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

223

A. You are talking about this twenty

years ago?

Q. He started to discuss this with you

twenty years ago?

A. He didn't tell me this twenty years

ago.

Q. Not the details. I'm saying he

started the story, the discussion of this?

A. Yes, about twenty years ago.

Q. But it was only more recently that

you were able to get these kinds of details?

A. Right. I just remember what he told

me back the way he would talk about it was

law enforcement that done it, and I just

thought -- at first, you know, for a long

time I thought he was just thinking somebody

else done it besides James Earl Ray, like I

thought somebody else done it.

It never really occurred to me until

after he started telling me the details about

it that that is what he meant years ago when

he was telling me. I didn't have no idea

that really law enforcement officers was

involved in it.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

224

Q. Nor should you.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you very

much, Mr. Milner.

Your witness.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Mr. Milner, you and I have talked

about this matter many --

A. Speak up a little bit.

Q. You and I have talked about this many

times, haven't we?

A. Right.

Q. Let me ask you something, when you

worked at the cab company, you worked for

Mr. Jowers when he owned the Veteran's Cab

company is that correct?

A. Right. He owned Veteran's Cab.

Q. He was not prejudiced in any way, you

had no idea he had was prejudiced against the

races, had no animosity?

A. Oh, no. He had no prejudice at all.

I would say over half the drivers that worked

there worked for him inside, you know, helped

as supervisors and everything else, with the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

225

money. As far as I know, Loyd never been

real prejudiced that I know of.

Q. He was fair to everybody, no matter

what color they are. Am I correct, sir?

A. Right.

Q. Now, all this information that you

have given, you said it was by telephone that

you obtained this by telephone in talking

with the later conversations with Mr. Jowers?

A. Right.

Q. Did this take place over more than

one day?

A. Oh, no. He would tell me just a

little bit of it every time I would call him,

we would just talk a little bit. Because I

had to work, you know, and I just couldn't be

just talking to him. I'd talk to him over

possibly two and a half, maybe three months

or whatever it was. Then he would just tell

me a little bit about it.

Q. He always told you, even back years

ago and up to then, that he was sorry Dr.

King was assassinated here in Memphis. Isn't

that correct?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

226

A. Right.

Q. He also told you that he never knew

anything that he may have been called upon by

Mr. Liberto -- there was never any mention

that it would be Dr. King?

A. He was told what, sir?

Q. He was never told that Dr. King would

be the target of any assassination in

anything that he was asked to do?

A. No. Frank Liberto, according to what

Loyd told me, Frank never told him what the

money was for or anything about the killing

or nothing like that.

Q. Okay. Mr. Milner, mostly what you

told the Court and jury here today has been

in the news media about the same things you

have already told, that has been on the

newspaper and on the TV, isn't it? It has

pretty much been the same?

A. I've heard some things. I haven't

really kept up with what everybody has said.

Q. Okay.

A. I just know what Loyd told me.

MR. GARRISON: That's all, Your

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

227

Honor.

THE WITNESS: As a matter of

fact, even the books and stuff on it, I read

a book, and, you know, I didn't even -- I

never even read a book until after all this

stuff he told me, because I was interested

about it.

Q. (BY MR. GARRISON) Did you ever know a

Mr. McCraw, a gentleman named McCraw?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you ever talk to him about this?

A. I never talked to him about it. But

he was the one back years ago that was

talking about -- thought Loyd was involved in

it, you know, and he knew who killed Martin

Luther King. I knew McCraw pretty well, but

I never talked to him about this.

Q. All these were rumors going around?

A. Just rumors. You hear everything in

the cab business.

MR. GARRISON: Thank you, sir.

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Mr. Milner, this is very important.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

228

Did you get any of this information, any of

these details, from any other source --

A. No, sir.

Q. -- but Mr. Jowers?

A. What I have told you is exactly what

Loyd told me. I've read some books on it

afterwards, you know, about the killing and

stuff like that, but a lot of stuff I read,

you know, was nothing like what Loyd was

talking about, you know.

Loyd, what he told me was completely

different. Everything I read, James Earl Ray

done it, or they thought the military was

involved in it or different things like that,

you know. Which I don't know anything about

that. Loyd never even mentioned nothing like

that. Loyd just told me what he knew about

it.

Q. So you -- have you not gotten any of

these details from any newspaper article, any

book, any other writing at all?

A. What I've told you today?

Q. Yes.

A. No, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

229

Q. Solely from Mr. Jowers?

A. Sir?

Q. Only from Mr. Jowers?

A. Only from Mr. Jowers.

Q. There have been a number of people

who have written books on this case, one

fairly recently who calls himself an expert

on the case. Have any writers interviewed

you for their work?

A. No, sir.

Q. And asked you what you knew?

A. Has anybody asked me questions?

Q. Has any writer interviewed you?

A. No, sir. No writer has talked to me

about doing a book on it or nothing.

MR. PEPPER: No further

questions.

THE COURT: All right, then.

You may stand down, Mr. Milner. You are free

to go or you can remain in the courtroom if

you want to.

THE WITNESS: I'll just go

outside.

(Witness excused.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

230

THE COURT: Call your next

witness, please.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiffs call Mr. Floyd Newsom.

THE COURT: Does Mr. Milner know

he is not to discuss his testimony with the

media?

MR. PEPPER: He has been

advised, Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right.

MR. PEPPER: They fall pray when

they walk outside this room.

FLOYD E. NEWSOM

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good morning, Mr. Newsom.

A. Good morning, sir.

Q. It has been a long time.

A. Yes, it has.

Q. Thank you for coming down here this

morning. Let me ask you to state for the

record, please, your name and address.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

231

A. My name is Floyd E. Newsom, Sr. My

address is 1203 North Lion's Gate Drive.

Q. Memphis, Tennessee?

A. Memphis, Tennessee, the zip is 38116.

Q. Mr. Newsom, would you tell us what

you presently do?

A. I'm retired.

Q. And how long have you been retired?

A. Since 1989, ten years.

Q. And did you at one point earlier in

your life work for the Memphis Fire

Department?

A. I did, sir.

Q. When did you join the Memphis Fire

Department?

A. 7/11/1955.

Q. How long were you in service?

A. I retired 7/11/1989, sir.

Thirty-four years.

Q. So you were a serving fireman for

thirty-four years?

A. Yes, sir. There was a break of about

five years in there.

Q. When would that have been?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

232

A. That was 1968.

Q. When in 1968?

A. I resigned on May the 18th, 1968.

Q. You resigned on May the 18th, 1968?

A. Yes.

Q. I want to cover some of that period

of time when you worked for the Memphis Fire

Department. It is a part of the plaintiff's

case that we have sectioned off to call

"local conspiracy."

You, Mr. Newsom, were at a critical

point in time stationed at Firehouse Number

2, weren't you?

A. Yes, sir.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor, if it

please the Court, I think we'd like to put up

a graphic description of the area at this

point so that the jury doesn't just hear

words about the place we're talking about so

they might be able to visualize it.

THE COURT: I'll allow it.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you. Your

Honor, I've shown the drawing to counsel for

the defense. He has approved it as basically

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

233

accurate.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Mr. Newsom, can you

see that board?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Do you recognize that area?

A. Pretty much, yes.

Q. This is South Main Street. It

parallels Mulberry Street. Is that right?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And is this the fire station where

you were?

A. Yes, sir, it is.

Q. Where you were stationed?

A. Yes.

Q. So it on the corner really of Butler,

Mulberry and South Main Street?

A. That's right.

Q. And the Lorraine Motel where Dr. King

was staying was on the opposite side of

Mulberry Street facing sort of at an angle

the fire station?

A. That's right.

Q. Now, how long were you stationed at

Number 2?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

234

A. Two years.

Q. What was the periods of time that you

were there?

A. What do you mean, sir?

Q. How long -- from when to when during

that two-year period?

A. The shifts?

Q. No, just which two years?

A. 1966 to 1968.

Q. Were you assigned to that station in

April of 1968?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, was there a -- to the best of

your knowledge, was there a police

intelligence surveillance operation being

conducted out of that station at the time of

Martin Luther King's visit to Memphis?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And how many officers were involved

in that surveillance?

A. Well, that's a long time back.

Q. Yes.

A. I know of two that I was familiar

with. There could have been others.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

235

Q. And who were the two that you knew

of?

A. Officer Redditt and -- I have the

other person's name written here, if I'm

allowed to look and see. Richmond.

Q. Officers Redditt and Richmond?

A. And Richmond.

Q. And from which area of the fire

station did they actually conduct the

surveillance, do you recall?

A. Well, it was basically done from the

locker room.

Q. That was in the rear?

A. Yes.

Q. Were there windows there?

A. Yes. Windows up at the top part of

the locker room.

Q. Did those windows afford a good view

of the Lorraine Motel?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, were you on duty on the 4th of

April, 1968, at Fire Station Number 2, at the

time of the assassination?

A. I was on duty, but I wasn't at the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

236

Number 2, sir.

Q. You were not at the Number 2?

A. No. I was supposed to be at the

Number 2.

Q. You were supposed to be at the Number

2, but you weren't at the Number 2?

A. Right.

Q. Would you tell the Court and the jury

why you were not at the Number 2?

A. Well, I was not there because on

April the 3rd, the night of April the 3rd, I

received a call at home from a lieutenant at

that time, Lieutenant Smith, who instructed

me not to report to the Number 2 on my

regular duty to my regular company but

instead report to Number 31. That was out on

Overton Crossing at the opposite end of town.

Q. What time of night did you receive

this call?

A. After ten.

Q. After ten o'clock at night you

received a call and orders to go to another

fire station?

A. That's right.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

237

Q. The next day. What was the emergency

that caused you to be changed, you to be

moved to another fire station?

A. Sir, there was no emergency that

caused me to be changed.

Q. There was no emergency?

A. No, sir.

Q. Mr. Newsom, how many black firemen

were assigned to Number 2?

A. Two. N. E. Wallace was assigned to

the opposite shift from me on a different

company but at the Number 2's engine house.

Q. So there were two black firemen

assigned to Number 2's?

A. That's right.

Q. And you were one of the two?

A. That's right.

Q. And sometime after ten o'clock that

night you were assigned to another station?

A. That's right.

Q. When you went to that other station

the next day, did you find that you were

needed?

A. No, sir, I was not needed. I was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

238

needed on my company because my leaving my

company left my company out of service unless

somebody else was detailed to my company in

my stead.

Q. So you are telling this Court that

you were surplused to requirements where you

were sent, and that undermanned your home

company?

A. That's right.

Q. Mr. Newsom, did you ever inquire why

you were assigned away from your station?

A. Yes, sir, I did.

Q. What did you learn?

A. Not much. When I first inquired.

Time after time after time I was eventually

told that I was transferred by officers of

the police department or by request of the

police department.

Q. So finally you got an answer to your

question?

A. Yes.

Q. And you were told that you were

transferred at the request of the Memphis

Police Department?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

239

A. That's right.

Q. Have you thought about this over all

these years?

A. Well, yes.

Q. Have you formed any opinion of your

own about why you were transferred?

A. Not really. I just know that it was

very unusual and unnecessary. So it had to

be done for some reason. I don't know the

reason.

Q. What happened to the other black fire

officer?

A. He was also detailed out. He was

detailed out on the 3rd. He was working the

3rd. I would have been working the 4th. He

was detailed out to the airport on the 3rd,

that night of the 3rd.

Q. So on the night of the 3rd he was

also detailed out?

A. That's right.

Q. So both black officers at this fire

station were removed from duty?

A. That's right. Not from duty but from

that engine house.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

240

Q. From duty at that station. I'm

sorry.

A. Right.

Q. On the day around the time of the

killing they were both absent?

A. Right.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you, Mr.

Newsom. No further questions.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Mr. Newsom, were you familiar with

the area behind the rooming house where there

is a lot of brush and trees growing back

there all the time you worked the fire

station, had you seen that, sir?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Okay. Had you ever seen any activity

in there of any one walking or any activity

in there where there appeared to be someone

was back there that you can recall?

A. In the trees?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. Not that I can remember.

Q. I believe you said now you resigned

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

241

from the Memphis Fire Department in May of

1968?

A. That's right.

Q. And did this have anything to do with

your resignation, the fact that you had been

removed and you felt you had been wrongfully

removed, did it have anything to do with your

resignation?

A. The fact that I was wrongfully moved

didn't necessarily have anything to do with

it. What had something to do with it was

that due to the effects of Dr. King's

assassination, my wife got -- was ill, and

she at that time was working for

International Harvester. And the doctor at

International Harvester recommended that she

change sceneries.

So she -- they sent her to

California, which left me with two children

at home. I went and asked for a leave of

absence. I was denied the leave of absence.

So I chose to leave.

Q. You had to resign in order to do what

you wanted to do?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

242

A. Right. To do what I needed to do, to

do what my duty was to do.

Q. Who was the person -- was it

Commissioner Holloman over the fire and

police department?

A. That's right.

Q. At that time? Who denied your

request for a leave of absence? Do you know

who that person was?

A. Chief Hamilton.

MR. GARRISON: That's all.

THE COURT: Anything further.

MR. PEPPER: Yes. Just briefly,

Your Honor.

THE COURT: Go ahead.

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Mr. Newsom, were you involved at all

in any supportive activities of the

sanitation workers' strike?

A. Yes, sir, I was very active in the

sanitation workers' strike.

Q. What did you do? How did you attempt

to support the striking workers?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

243

A. Well, I'll tell you -- I attended

their meetings, supported them orally, also

acted as a monitor when they had different

demonstrations, et cetera, at which time I

was under surveillance, I guess by the Fire

Department, because they wrote reports on me

like every other day as to my whereabouts and

what I was doing.

Q. And those were surveillance reports

on you?

A. Yes.

Q. Is it fair to say that you were not

trusted by the police and fire authorities in

Memphis because of your activities?

A. I guess you could say that.

Q. Did anyone ever tell you that they

thought you were untrustworthy or unreliable?

A. No, sir.

Q. But there was no secret made of your

community activities?

A. No, sir. But I never was disciplined

for it.

Q. Would there have been any reason for

you to be disciplined for those activities?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

244

A. Well, if it was wrong, then I figured

I would have been.

Q. But you fulfilled all of your work

requirements as a fireman?

A. I did. I never was late during the

whole time I worked there.

Q. When did you return to active duty at

Fire Station Number 2?

A. I didn't.

Q. You never went back there?

A. (Nodding.) No, sir.

Q. So from the night of April 3rd when

you were told to go away to another station,

you never returned to that station?

A. No, sir.

MR. PEPPER: No further

questions. Thank you very much.

THE COURT: Mr. Garrison.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, I

have nothing further.

THE COURT: All right, sir. You

may stand down, Mr. Newsom. You are free to

leave or you can remain in the courtroom.

(Witness excused.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

245

THE COURT: Anyone need to take

a comfort break? Mr. Garrison?

MR. GARRISON: I'm okay today,

Your Honor. I won't be the only one.

THE COURT: Me, too.

MR. PEPPER: Plaintiffs call

Chief Norville Wallace to the stand, please.

THE COURT: All right.

NORVILLE WALLACE

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good morning, Chief Wallace.

A. Good morning.

Q. Thank you for coming this morning.

Would you state your name and address for the

record, please.

A. Norville Wallace, 2365 Perry Road,

Memphis, Tennessee.

Q. Chief Wallace, you were employed by

the Memphis Fire Department for a number of

years. Is that true?

A. That's correct.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

246

Q. What do you presently do?

A. Loaf. Nothing.

Q. Wonderful occupation, Chief. How

long did you work for the Fire Department?

A. Thirty-seven years, six months.

Q. Thirty seven years and six months.

What did you do for the Fire Department and

what was your -- what ranks did you go

through?

A. I started out as a fire fighter, made

lieutenant, captain, investigator, deputy

fire marshal. When I left, I was assistant

fire marshal.

Q. Did you serve at a number of the

stations around Memphis?

A. Yes, several of them.

Q. Which were the ones you served at?

A. 8, 2, 24 and the Fire Prevention

Bureau.

Q. When, Chief Wallace, did you serve at

the 2's?

A. I first went there in 1966.

Q. How long were you there during that

period of time?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

247

A. I left November of 1968.

Q. So you were serving at the 2's at the

time of the assassination of Martin Luther

King?

A. That's right.

Q. Chief Wallace, would you just take a

look at this drawing here. Do you recognize

this area?

A. Oh, yes.

Q. Do you recognize Mulberry Street that

ran behind the fire station?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. South Main Street that ran in front

of it?

A. Right.

Q. Butler Avenue that ran to the south

of it and, of course, Huling Avenue at the

north end of this particular block?

A. Right.

Q. Is this, to your recollection and

current present recollection, is this where

the Fire Station Number 2 was located?

A. Yes.

Q. It backed onto Mulberry and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

248

overlooked the Lorraine Motel where Martin

Luther King was staying?

A. Right.

Q. Chief Wallace, were you on duty at

that fire station on the 4th of April, 1968?

A. Was that the day before?

Q. That was the day of the 4th when

Martin Luther King was assassinated?

A. I was on duty there until somewhere

around eight p.m. that afternoon.

Q. Were you -- you were on duty, but

were you in that station at that time?

A. Right.

Q. Were you at any time transferred out

of that station?

A. Yeah. About eight p.m. that night

I'm saying eight p.m. It was night.

Q. Were you transferred -- let's

understand this. Were you transferred out on

eight p.m. the night of the killing or the

night before the killing?

A. The night before.

Q. It was the night before the killing.

And how were you transferred, how did you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

249

receive your orders to be transferred out?

A. Well, I received them from my

captain. He said I was going to be detailed

to 33's, which is out at the airport. I

thought it was just for the rest of -- the

remainder of the day or night. That night we

had an airplane run off the runway out there,

and I thought somebody back in those days,

you make a run like that, somebody gets

suspended. So I thought I was filling in for

somebody that got suspended. But once I

got -- and it was raining hard. You couldn't

see to drive.

Q. This was the night of April 3rd?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. It was raining hard. You were told

by your captain to go out to the airport?

A. Engine 33.

Q. Sorry?

A. Engine 33.

Q. 33. Did he tell you this

face-to-face?

A. Yeah.

Q. So you were sent away?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

250

A. Right.

Q. Did that surprise you?

A. Well, not at the time it didn't. The

surprises came later.

Q. What were the surprises that came

later?

A. I ended up staying out there over a

month.

Q. Right.

A. I just had the uniform I left there

with, and the next day, well, I was told that

morning when I got off at seven a.m. to

report back there. So I left and was going

back to home base to pick up some uniforms,

and they wouldn't even let me off of Main

Street.

Q. Let me understand this. You were

told at seven a.m. the next morning --

A. To report back to 33's.

Q. -- to report back to the airport

station?

A. Right.

Q. And how did you get that message?

A. From the officer in charge of the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

251

piece of equipment there.

Q. Face-to-face?

A. Yes.

Q. Again you came in to go to work? I'm

trying to understand because you were on a

different shift. Did you actually report to

the 2's and were sent away again?

A. No. I just went to the 2's to get a

uniform.

Q. You just went there to get uniforms.

How did you actually learn that you were not

to report to the 2's on your shift but to go

back to the airport?

A. I learned that that morning of the

4th when I got off to come back the next

workday -- you know, it is an every-other-day

thing. The reason I went back to the 2's

was to get clean uniforms.

Q. Who told you not to come to the 2's?

A. The officer in charge of 33.

Q. The officer in charge of 33 told you

you were to report back out there and not go

to the 2's on April 4th?

A. That's right.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

252

Q. So then you went to get some clean

uniforms?

A. Yes.

Q. What happened?

A. They wouldn't let me go to the engine

house. They said couldn't anybody come up

there.

Q. What do you mean they wouldn't let

you go? What did you do? Did you come up to

the fire station?

A. No. I think I got stopped at Butler

and Main.

Q. Somebody stopped you here?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. This corner here. Who was it that

stopped you?

A. They had it blocked off. Police had

barricades and everything else.

Q. This is -- this was the next day you

were reporting to work?

A. Really that was the morning of the

4th.

Q. So you are saying on the morning of

the 4th that they had some --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

253

A. Well, it was the same day that Dr.

King was assassinated.

Q. They wouldn't let you into the

station?

A. They wouldn't let me up there to get

uniforms. They wouldn't even let me up the

street.

Q. Chief Wallace, did you ever ask what

this was all about?

A. Yes.

Q. What were you told?

A. Told that I had been threatened.

That was the reason I was out at the other

engine house.

Q. Oh, you were threatened?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. Why would you be threatened?

A. I don't know. Of course, I was

putting out fires, I guess.

Q. So there was a threat on your life.

I see. So they had to get you out of the

area?

A. I guess. That's what they done.

They got me out of the area.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

254

Q. How many black firemen were assigned

to Number 2?

A. Just two.

Q. You and --

A. Floyd Newsom on the other shift.

Q. Floyd Newsom. We're learning that

neither one of you were allowed to be on duty

on that day?

A. That's right.

Q. You never received a satisfactory

explanation?

A. No. Never did. Not to this day.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you, Chief

Wallace. No further questions.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Chief Wallace, you worked there at

this station how long, sir? How long were

you there altogether at this station?

A. About two years.

Q. Two years did you ever report back to

work there after the assassination of Dr.

King?

A. Oh, yeah.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

255

Q. You did report back?

A. Yeah.

Q. Are you familiar with the area behind

the rooming house that is raised up from the

street where there is a lot of trees and

bushes and things?

A. Right.

Q. Did you ever see anyone walking back

in there, any activity back there all the

time you worked there?

A. When are you talking about?

Q. Any time during the time of the

assassination did you ever see anyone walking

back in that area?

A. Yeah.

Q. Okay. More than once?

A. Well, I'll put it like this: If it

was ninety-nine policemen on duty,

ninety-eight of them was out in that area.

Q. In that brush area?

A. In the area, in the engine house, all

up and down that fence there. That fence had

a tree line that would separate the city

property from the area over there which had

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

256

heavy equipment parked in there.

Q. This area on the map where it shows

behind the rooming house where it shows the

shaded area, that's the tree area. You saw

police officers all in there?

A. They was all parked over there

looking on the ground and everything.

MR. GARRISON: Okay. Thank

you, sir.

MR. PEPPER: No further

questions, Your Honor. Thank you, Chief

Wallace.

THE COURT: Chief, I want to be

sure that I understand your testimony.

THE WITNESS: Yes, sir.

THE COURT: Are you saying that

Main Street was blocked off the morning of

the day that Dr. King was killed.

THE WITNESS: No, no.

THE COURT: Oh.

THE WITNESS: It was blocked off

afterwards. I tried to get up there to get a

uniform so I could have something clean to

wear to work the next day.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

257

THE COURT: So this was the day

after Dr. King was killed.

THE WITNESS: It was after,

because I was in my car when I heard the

news. I just made an effort to get by there

to get some uniforms before the time to go to

work the next morning. So it was in the

afternoon late.

THE COURT: But it was the day

after he was killed.

THE WITNESS: Right.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor has

raised an interesting point of clarification.

May I ask a further question?

THE COURT: Yes.

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Chief, Your Honor is clarifying your

testimony. It is a very important point.

What time would you have reported for work on

the afternoon of the 4th? What time did your

shift start?

A. I wouldn't have reported on the 4th.

Q. You were off on the 4th?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

258

A. I worked the 3rd. So that would mean

I would have reported back to work on the

5th.

Q. So you worked the 3rd --

A. Mr. Newsom would have worked the 4th.

Q. Mr. Newsom would have worked the 4th?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. You would have reported back on the

5th. But you came by sometime in the evening

of the 4th after the assassination to get

your clothing?

A. Right.

Q. You weren't allowed anywhere into

that area?

A. Right.

Q. And then on the 5th when you were to

return to work you were told not to go back

to your regular base, Number 2?

A. I was told that the morning of the

4th, though.

Q. You were told that on the 4th, that

you were not going to be allowed back there?

A. Right.

Q. How long had you served at Number 2

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

259

in uninterrupted fashion to that point?

A. Well, my total time at the 2's was

roughly two years. I went there in 1966.

That was when the Fire Department first

integrated. I left November -- I made

lieutenant in November of 1968 and I left and

was assigned elsewhere.

Q. When did you eventually go back to

Number 2?

A. About thirty days after the --

Q. You stayed out there for a month?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. Were you surplused to requirements at

that other station?

A. Do what now?

Q. Were you surplused to requirements?

Were you needed at the other station?

A. No.

Q. You weren't needed?

A. No. I was just an extra man.

Q. You were an extra man.

MR. PEPPER: No further

questions.

THE COURT: Mr. Garrison.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

260

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, I

have nothing further.

THE COURT: All right. Then you

may stand down, sir. You can remain in the

courtroom or you are free to leave. You

should not discuss your testimony with the

news media or anyone else.

THE WITNESS: Okay.

THE COURT: Let's take about

fifteen minutes.

(Jury out.)

(Short recess.)

THE COURT: Bring the jury out,

Mr. James.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: You may call your

next witness, Mr. Pepper.

MR. PEPPER: Yes, Your Honor.

Plaintiffs call Mr. Leon Cohen.

LEON COHEN

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

261

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Cohen.

A. Good afternoon.

Q. Thank you for coming down here today.

A. You are welcome.

Q. If you have any difficult any hearing

me, would you please signify that so I can

come closer.

A. I certainly will. Thank you.

Q. Would you state your name and address

for the record, please.

A. Leon Cohen. I reside at 1859 Poplar

Pines Drive, Number 201, Memphis, 38119.

THE COURT: Would you please

spell your last name?

THE WITNESS: C O H E N.

THE COURT: Thank you, sir.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Mr. Cohen, how long

you have lived in the City of Memphis?

A. Just under thirty years.

Q. Where did you live before that?

A. New York City.

Q. What did you do in New York City?

A. I was a member of the New York City

Police Department. For twenty-three years.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

262

Q. Did you retire from your position?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. When did you retire?

A. In 1965.

Q. And when did you come to Memphis?

A. Shortly thereafter.

Q. So you've been in Memphis sometime

since 1965 to the present?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. It has been your home?

A. Yes.

Q. And when you came to Memphis, was it

strictly as a retiree or did you become

engaged in any activity?

A. For a short time I worked as a

special deputy at Juvenile Court. Later on I

became director of security at Baptist

Hospital in Memphis.

Q. What year would you have become

director of security at Baptist Hospital?

A. I believe that was early in the

1970's.

Q. And what do you do today?

A. I'm fully retired.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

263

Q. Now, in 1968 or before 1968 did you

come to know a man named Walter Bailey?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. How did you come to meet Mr. Bailey?

A. I was associated with another lad in

the food business, and Mr. Bailey used to

come to our market and make purchases for the

motel. I got to know him very well.

Q. How often would you say you saw

Mr. Bailey in an average week or month?

A. Two or three times a week.

Q. And you became quite friendly with

him?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. And also with his wife?

A. No. Not his wife. I don't know his

wife. I met her on several occasions but did

not know her that well. Not as well as

Walter Bailey.

Q. Right. What did Mr. Bailey do for a

living in 1968?

A. He was the owner and the manager of

the Lorraine Motel.

Q. The Lorraine Motel, is that the same

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

264

motel which Martin Luther King came to stay

in Memphis on April 3rd, 1968?

A. That's correct.

Q. Were you familiar with the fact that

Dr. King was coming to Memphis at that time?

A. No. I was not.

Q. When did you learn that Dr. King was

in Memphis?

A. I was on my way back from Nashville

when I heard the news on the radio about his

assassination. That's the first I knew of

him being in Memphis.

Q. That would have been on the 4th of

April that you heard this news?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. When did you next see Mr. Walter

Bailey?

A. The very next morning.

Q. On the 5th of April you went to see

him?

A. No. I went to take -- to look over

the scene at the Lorraine Motel, and I took

some photographs while there. After I had

taken photographs, I ran into Mr. Bailey.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

265

Q. What time of the morning would that

have been?

A. Between eight and nine a.m., as I

best recall.

Q. So it was quite early in the morning?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Actually where did you go to look

over this scene? Where were you? What was

your path?

A. Well, I first went to the rooming

house where the alleged shots had been fired

and took some photographs from the lavatory

of the rooming house aiming towards the

Lorraine Motel. Then I went down and took

photographs of the Lorraine Motel and

vicinity. At that time I ran into

Mr. Bailey.

Q. And where did you meet Mr. Bailey?

A. Right outside his office.

Q. At the Lorraine Motel?

A. At the Lorraine Motel.

Q. Did you have a conversation with him?

A. Yes, sir, I did.

Q. And what -- how did you perceive him

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

266

at that time? Was he upset? How did you

view him?

A. Well, he seemed visibly upset about

the occurrence.

Q. Did you ask him any questions about

the incident?

A. I mentioned the terrible occurrence.

He said in response, if they had listened to

me, this wouldn't have happened. And he went

on to explain that the previous night, he got

a call from a member of Dr. King's group in

Atlanta who wanted him to change the location

of the room where Dr. King would be staying.

And he was adamantly against that because he

had provided security by the inner court for

Dr. King, Dr. King's room.

Q. Where did he want Dr. King to stay in

his motel?

A. There was an inner court behind the

office which had very good security. In

other words, it was not exposed to public

view. Per se.

Q. Right. Do you know if that would

have been Room 201?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

267

A. Pardon?

Q. Do you recall the number of that

room?

A. No, I don't.

Q. But it was in an inner court area?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And, instead, where did Mr. Bailey

say he was being instructed to move Dr. King?

A. The room -- I don't recall the room

number, but the room which Dr. King had

occupied that night, that's the room that

they wanted him to occupy.

Q. A balcony room?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. For the record, that was Room 306,

that balcony room. So Bailey said he was

instructed to move Martin King from room --

well, you didn't know the number, but from a

courtyard room to a balcony room?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did he say he opposed that?

A. He adamantly opposed it.

Q. Did he say who in Dr. King's

organization wanted him placed in that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

268

exposed balcony room?

A. He just mentioned that a member of

Dr. King's group had told him, advised him,

he wanted the room changed. He said he knew

the person, but I did not question him as to

who it was or his name or pedigree or

whatever.

Q. Did he indicate, when he spoke to

you, if you can reflect very carefully, Mr.

Cohen, did he use the pronoun "he" or "she"?

A. He used the pronoun "he."

Q. So some male member of Dr. King's

Atlanta office instructed the room change?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Once again, when did he receive that

instruction?

A. He said the previous night that Dr.

King was supposed to stay there.

Q. Prior to the arrival?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Just moving on, when you were down in

that area early that morning, did you then or

had you previously had an opportunity or

occasion to look at the area behind the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

269

rooming house?

A. No. No, that was the first and last

occasion.

Q. Did you look at the area that

morning?

A. After the assassination, yes, sir, I

did.

Q. How did it appear to you?

A. Which area are you referring to?

Q. I'm referring to the area behind the

rooming house above the wall on Mulberry

Street. I could show you -- we have -- can

you see this?

A. No, I can't.

MR. GARRISON: It probably

should be marked an exhibit. I don't think

it has been marked as an exhibit.

THE COURT: That's right. I

intended to do so. Let's make that Exhibit

1.

(The above-mentioned diagram was

marked Exhibit 1.)

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) I'm asking you about

this area here that is above the wall. There

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

270

is a wall here on Mulberry Street. I'm

asking you about this area which is behind

the rooming house.

A. Uh-huh.

Q. The rooming house has two wings.

There is an alleyway. This is vacant area

fenced in. I'm asking you about this. I

just wondered if you had a chance to look at

this.

A. Yes, I did, that very same morning I

had taken the photographs.

Q. And how did it appear to you? What

did you see?

A. Well, it was kind of dense with

underbrush.

Q. Dense with underbrush?

A. As a matter of fact, I went to the

room which James Earl Ray had occupied and

looked out the window which overlooks the

alley and looked out the window intending to

take some photographs, but I never did

because they wouldn't have shown anything

outside of the underbrush.

Q. So it was thick underbrush is what

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

271

you are saying?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Okay.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you,

Mr. Cohen. No further questions.

THE WITNESS: You are welcome.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, I

don't have any questions of Mr. Cohen.

THE COURT: All right, sir. You

may stand down. You can remain in the

courtroom or you are free to leave. I ask

you not to discuss your testimony with anyone

outside the courtroom.

(Witness excused)

MS. ATKINS-HILL: With Your

Honor's approval, we would like to read the

sworn statement of James McCraw. Mr. McCraw

is now deceased. He was deposed on October

22nd.

THE COURT: How lengthy is it?

MS. ATKINS-HILL: Your Honor, I

only want to read experts from it. Actually,

it is thirty pages.

THE COURT: Thirty pages. But

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

272

you are not going to read it in content?

MS. ATKINS-HILL: No, Your

Honor.

THE COURT: Okay. Let's go with

it.

MS. ATKINS-HILL: Question, by

Attorney Pepper --

THE COURT: Ladies and

gentlemen, I explained to you before that

this is what we call a deposition, which is

testimony taken before the trial. It was

sworn to at the time that it was given, so

you many accept this as if that testimony

were being given in the courtroom at this

time.

Go ahead.

MS. ATKINS-HILL: Thank you,

your Honor.

Question: You were employed by a

taxi company at the time?

Answer: Yes, Yellow Cab Company.

Question: How long had you been

driving for the Yellow Cab Company?

Answer: You got me. I drove for

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

273

Yellow for forty-one years.

THE COURT: Would you please

identify your page and lines as you go.

MS. ATKINS-HILL: Page 3, your

Honor, line 25.

THE COURT: All right. Go

ahead.

MS. ATKINS-HILL: Where were you

born, Mr. McCraw?

Answer, top of page 4: Alabama.

Question: How long have you lived

in Memphis, Tennessee?

Answer: Ever since 1945.

Line 8, question: Right. Were you

in the armed services during the Second World

War?

Answer: I was in the Air Force. I

was on Guam and Saipan.

Line 15 -- line 13, question: How

many years were you in the service?

Answer: About five years.

Question: When were you discharged?

Answer: 1945.

Question: What was the nature of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

274

your discharge?

Answer: Honorable discharge.

Question: What did you do for a

living during those years -- let me back up.

Line 20, question: After the war, you then

settled in Memphis, did you?

Answer: Wound up here in 1946.

Question: What did you do for a

living during those years?

Answer: I drove a taxicab.

Top of page 5, line 1, question: So

you have been a taxicab driver for a good

number of years previous to the time in

question?

Answer: Yes.

Question: Now, on April the 4th,

1968, you were driving a cab and did you

receive a call to pick up a passenger at 422

and one half South Main Street?

Answer: I sure did, old Charlie

Stephens.

Question, line 10: You received a

call to pick up one Charles Stephens at 422

and a half South Main. What time of day did

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

275

you receive this assignment?

Answer: I don't really remember,

but it wasn't more than a few minutes before

Martin Luther King got shot.

Question, line 19: So it was

sometime before six p.m. on Thursday, April

the 4th?

Answer: That's right.

Question: Would you say it was

sometime before a quarter to six or was it

after a quarter to six?

Answer: It was after a quarter to

six.

Question: It was after a quarter to

six?

Answer, top of page 6: That was

when left to get old Charlie and got to Main

and it had come over the radio that Martin

Luther King had been shot and I should stay

out of there.

Mr. Herman, who was the interpreter

at the time -- Mr. McCraw had a voice

box. Mr. Herman: It came over the radio

that Martin Luther King had got shot and stay

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

276

out of there.

Question: About what time did

you -- you actually parked your car in front

of the rooming house where Charlie Stephen

was living sometime after a quarter to six or

before six. Is that right?

Answer: That's right.

Question: Where did you park your

car?

Answer: Right out in front of it.

And I was double parked.

Question: Right out in front of the

rooming house and you were double parked?

Answer: The witness nodding

affirmatively.

Question: Right. What did you do

then.

Answer: I went upstairs to

Charlie's room, and he was too drunk to get

up. I turned the light off and left. I got

in my cab.

Question: Let's go question and

answer, question and answer, as best we can.

You went upstairs to Charlie Stephens' room?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

277

The top of page 7.

Answer: Right.

Question: Do you recall which room

this was?

Answer: Well, it was the last room

back on the right right next to the

restroom. I don't remember the number.

Question: Right. Which stairway

did you go up? There were two stairways into

the rooming house.

Answer: Well, I went up the one

right beside the restroom and went upstairs.

That door stays open all night.

Question: When you went up the

stairway to approach Mr. Stephens' room, did

you notice the bathroom?

Answer: Yeah, it was right next

door to his room.

Question: Was the bathroom door

open or closed?

Answer: It was standing wide open.

Question: The bathroom door was

standing wide open and this again was

sometime just prior to six o'clock?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

278

Answer: That's right.

Question: Was there anyone in the

bathroom?

Answer: No.

Question: Was the light on so far

as you can remember? If you can't --

Answer: I don't remember.

Question: But you are stating that

the bathroom door was wide open?

Answer: Bathroom was wide open.

Question: No one was inside?

Answer: I sure didn't see nobody.

Mr. Herman: The doors went out

toward the hallway.

Question: Did you knock on Charlie

Stephens' door?

Answer: I knocked on the door and

somebody said, come in. I opened the door,

and he was laying on the bed too drunk to get

up.

Question: He was lying on the bed

and he was drunk, he couldn't get up?

Answer: That's right.

Question: Did he say anything to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

279

you?

Answer: No. I just said, I ain't

going to haul you.

Line 19, question: Did you see

anyone else in the room?

Answer: Yeah, his girlfriend was at

the foot of the bed, and she was drunk, too.

Top of page 9, line 3.

Question: So what did you do then?

I just turned around and left.

Question: Did you go down the same

stairway that you came up?

Answer: I went down them and walked

outside and got in my car and drove.

Question: Did you notice the

bathroom on your way out?

Answer: Well, the door was still

open.

Question: The door was still open?

You are quite certain of that?

Answer: Yeah, I'm quite sure of it.

Question: Right. Mr. McCraw, when

you were going into the rooming house to

ascend the stairs to pick up Charlie

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

280

Stephens, did you notice any automobiles

parked in front?

Answer: Yeah, Loyd Jowers' car was

parked in front.

Mr. Herman: Loyd Jowers' car?

Answer: And then there was two

Mustangs.

Question: Two Mustangs?

Answer: And a gray truck was parked

there.

Mr. Herman: Gray truck.

Question by Dr. Pepper. It must

have been some sort of delivery truck.

Question: Top of page 10. When you

were leaving and you were returning to your

car, did you notice whether or not a Mustang

was -- had gone, had departed?

Answer: I don't remember whether

both of them was there or not.

Page 11, line 3.

Now, what did you do when you got

into your car? I made an U-turn. I told the

dispatcher I wouldn't haul him, he was too

drunk.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

281

Mr. Herman: I made an U-turn, I

told the dispatcher I wouldn't haul him

because he was too drunk.

Answer: And they tried to give me

another order over in River Bluff, and I got

to Main and Calhoun when they come over the

radio that Martin Luther King had just got

shot. I was to stay out of that area.

Question: How long after you made

your U-turn and headed away from the rooming

house did you hear this bulletin?

Answer: It couldn't have been over

three minutes or four. It might have been --

Mr. Herman: Say it again.

The witness: It probably wasn't

over -- it couldn't have been over four

minutes. It couldn't have been that long of

a time. It might have been about two or

three minutes.

Page 12, line 2.

Question: So how many minutes would

it have been in your view from the time that

you actually left the rooming house until you

heard the bulletin?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

282

Answer: About four minutes.

Question: About four minutes. What

did you do then?

Answer: Well, I just turned right

on Calhoun and went on over to River Bluff

and picked up my passenger and come back to

the bus -- I tried to get to the bus station,

but I couldn't get in there because there was

traffic stopped ever which way.

Question: Right, Mr. McCraw. Let's

move ahead to the next day. What time were

you due to start work the next day?

Answer: Two o'clock.

Question: This is now Friday, April

the 5th. Is that right?

Answer: That's right.

Question: And prior to going to

work, what did you do?

Answer: I was at Jim's Grill.

Line 25, question: So you went to

Jim's Grill?

Page 13.

Answer: To have a couple of beers.

Question: What time?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

283

Answer: Twelve o'clock.

Question: Around twelve o'clock

prior to going to work?

Answer: I went to work at two

o'clock.

Question: Who was in Jim's Grill at

that time?

Answer: I don't really know. I

know Loyd Jowers was behind the bar.

Question: Loyd Jowers?

Answer: Was behind the bar, was

behind the counter.

Question: Was behind the counter?

Answer: Witness nodding

affirmatively.

Question: Where did you stand or

sit in the grill.

Answer: Right in the corner of the

grill.

Then it became inaudible.

Did you have a conversation with

Loyd Jowers?

Answer: Yeah, he showed me the box

the gun was in and showed me the gun. He put

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

284

it back under the counter.

Question: He showed you a box that

a gun was in?

Answer: Yeah.

Question: Where was he keeping

this?

Answer: In under the counter.

Question: Under the counter?

Actually, right underneath on a shelf

underneath the counter?

Answer: Yeah.

Question: Did you take the lid off

of the box so that you could see that a gun

was in it?

Answer: Yeah, he showed me the

gun.

Question: Did he physically take it

out from under the counter to show it to

you?

Answer: He take it right out to the

edge of the counter and opened the lid up on

it.

Question: He took it right out to

the edge of the counter and opened the lid.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

285

So you have no question what you saw?

Answer: No, I sure don't.

Question: What did Mr. Jowers do

with this gun event actually? Answer he took

it to the police.

Question: How do you know he turned

it over to the police?

Answer: He told me, and I believed

him.

Question: He told you he turned it

over to the police. When did he tell you

that he turned it over to the police?

Answer: That night.

Question: That evening?

Answer: When I come back in about

six or seven o'clock, he told me.

Page 15.

Question: So your statement is that

you came back in around -- sometime between

six and seven o'clock and he was still there?

Answer: Oh, yeah. He stayed there

all night.

Question: And he told you that he

had turned this gun over to the police?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

286

Answer: That's right.

Line 10.

Question: Did you ever discuss the

existence of this gun again with Mr. Jowers?

Answer: Well, he said -- he told me

a couple of times that he was scared. He

said he wished he would have kept it.

Page 18, line 9.

Question: You told the Memphis

Police Department investigators -- you told

Memphis Police Department detectives and you

told the FBI about the existence of this

gun?

Answer: I did.

Question: And you told the Justice

Department investigators about the existence

of this weapon?

Answer: I sure did.

Question: And what have --

individually what have they said to you about

this?

Answer: Nothing much. All they

said was that I shouldn't be talking to

people about it and all that kind of crap.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

287

Mr. Herman: They told me that I

shouldn't be talking to people about it and

all that kind of crap.

Page 19, line 7.

After the guilty plea proceedings

against James Earl Ray, were you contacted

again by Memphis Police Department, Attorney

General's investigators, FBI or anyone else?

Answer: Oh, yeah, but it went on

for two years.

Question: It went on for two

years? Who used to contact you after this?

Answer: I forget the names, but it

was the Justice Department, FBI, police

department.

Line 23.

Yes, but did the FBI specifically

interview you other times after James' guilty

plea?

Page 20.

Answer: Oh, yes.

Question: What did they say to you

during these interviews?

Answer: They just asked me the same

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

288

old questions all the time.

Line 8.

Question: Did they ask you about

the gun?

Answer: They asked me everything.

Question: Did they advise you not

to speak with anyone else?

Answer: They told me not to, but I

didn't pay them no attention.

Line 18.

Question: And how long did this go

on after James Earl Ray's guilty plea?

Answer: Two or three, four years.

Every time there was a trial or something or

started to have a trial here, they would

come.

Page 21, line 9.

Question: Would they come out to

visit you at your home?

Answer: That's the only place where

they could catch me. They would tell me at

the cab company they was looking for me. I

said, bye, I'm gone. I worked for myself,

they couldn't find me.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

289

Line 18.

Question: Mr. McCraw, do you know

the names of the FBI agents who would come

out to visit you?

Answer: No. All I know is they was

out of Washington.

Question: They were out of

Washington? You don't know any of the agents

from the local office who would come to visit

you?

Answer: Well, I don't remember his

name, but me and him were -- (Inaudible) him

pretty good. He was always begging me for

information. I said, man, I don't know

nothing.

Line 5, the witness: The one, the

FBI, the one that was over the FBI here.

Mr. Herman: The one that was over

the FBI here?

Line 9, Dr. Pepper: Jenson.

Question: Do you recall the name of

Jenson?

Line 12.

Answer: That sounds awful

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

290

familiar.

Question: Mr. McCraw, as we

conclude, I'm going to just simply ask you

some very specific questions just for the

purpose of clarification of what you observed

on the date of April the 4th, 1968.

When you approached Charles

Stephens' room to pick him up that day, your

statement is that the bathroom door was

open. Is that right?

Answer: That's right.

Question: And that the bathroom was

unoccupied. Is that right?

Answer: There was nobody in it.

Question: There was nobody in it?

Answer: Right.

Question: And that when you saw

Charles Stephens, it is your view that he was

lying on the bed and appeared to be

intoxicated?

Page 23, line 2.

Answer: He was drunk before I ever

went to him.

Question: On this basis you decided

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

291

not to haul him?

Answer: That's right. When he

couldn't get up and walk out of that room, I

knowed (sic) I wasn't hauling him.

Question: Right. Had you ever

driven him before when he was drunk?

Answer: Many times.

Question: On those occasions was he

as drunk as he was that day?

Answer: No.

Question: Right. Now, the next day

when you went into Loyd Jowers' Jim's Grill

sometime around noon and you went up to the

bar and you were conversing with him in that

bar, your statement is that Loyd Jowers

pulled a box out from under the counter,

lifted the lid and showed you a weapon. Is

that right?

Answer: That's right.

Question: The weapon was a rifle?

Answer: It was a rifle.

Question: Did it have a telescopic

sight on it or do you recall?

Answer: It was laying on the side.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

292

It wasn't on it, but it was in the box.

Top of page 24, line 4.

Question: It wasn't on it but it

was in the box?

Answer: Yeah.

Line 13.

Question: This was within a very

few minutes of you having noticed the

bathroom being empty?

Answer: Three or four minutes.

Question: Three or four minutes you

noticed the bathroom previously, the bathroom

had been empty?

Answer: (Witness nodding

affirmatively.)

MS. ATKINS-HILL: That's the end

of the excerpts.

THE COURT: We're going to take

our lunch break and resume at two o'clock,

ladies and gentlemen.

(Jury out.)

(Lunch recess.)

THE COURT: Bring the jury out,

please, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

293

THE SHERIFF: Yes, sir.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: All right. You may

call your next witness, Mr. Pepper.

MR. PEPPER: Yes, Your Honor.

Your Honor, the plaintiffs call Captain Jerry

Williams. Captain Jerry Williams.

Let's call Lieutenant Ed Redditt.

EDWARD E. REDDITT

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Detective Redditt.

A. Good afternoon.

Q. Thank you very much for coming here

this afternoon. It is a pleasure to see you

every few years. Would you state your name

and address for the record, please.

A. My name is Edward E. Redditt, 370

Evergreen, Somerville, Tennessee.

Q. Detective Redditt, what do you

presently do for a living?

A. As part of my volunteerism, I'm the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

294

head high school track and field and

cross-country coach for boys and girls and

elementary school.

Q. Is that a full-time professional

activity for you?

A. Full-time, and I enjoy every bit of

it.

Q. And how long have you lived up in

Fayette County?

A. Since 1986.

Q. Before that where did you reside?

A. I resided in Bartlett.

Q. Is there a time when you were

employed by the Memphis Police Department?

A. 1593 South Wellington.

Q. How long did you serve as an officer

with the Memphis Police Department?

A. Ten and a half years.

Q. Can you tell us the various positions

that you held in the department from the time

that you entered until the time that you

left?

A. I worked as one of the first persons

in the detention area. I worked as a desk

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

295

lieutenant. I worked in various special

units, such as vice squad, homicide,

burglary, also working in the areas of the

sanitation department, working to find out

what was going on there, from that to the

juvenile bureau, from that to the police

community relations.

Q. When did you become a police

community relations officer?

A. 1965.

Q. Were you still a police community

relations officer in 1968 at the time of the

assassination of Martin Luther King?

A. Yes.

Q. As a police community relations

officer, what were your duties?

A. Well, when we started there, there

was nothing written about it, so we was to

develop our own methods and ways of dealing

with the community. Our idea was how do we

get the community to be responsive and

understand the police workings.

I had a center at 1310 Florida

Street where I worked the kids and we

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

296

designed the first daycare center that met

all the qualifications for community health

and library and what MIFA is today, getting

food from various entities.

Q. At the time of the sanitation

workers' strike, what -- were you still

working with the community? Were you still

involved with the community? How did you

relate to the events that were going on then?

A. Well, I was somewhat pulled out to

kind of survey or serve -- I call it

surveillance. I was given kind of carte

blanche to do what I thought was necessary.

I think the whole background idea was to

observe or to find out anyone who may be

coming into the city to disrupt it.

One incident, Chief MacDonald asked

me to be sure to watch for a number of

out-of-town license plates, because

Chattanooga was known for dynamiting and this

type thing.

Q. Were you actually secunded to the

intelligence bureau at that point in time?

A. I guess I was kind of if you want to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

297

call it TDY to that entity.

Q. Right. You were assigned to

intelligence department duties?

A. Right.

Q. Did that give you any problems with

the relationships you had in the community,

because you were working with the community

and now moving into more or less

intelligence, surveillance activities?

A. I didn't see any conflict. Everybody

knew me and I knew everybody. So there was

no conflict. Again, the role that I viewed

was, one, trying to again protect the

community against anything that may be

occurring to disrupt anything.

Q. What was your actual rank at this

time?

A. I was still a detective.

Q. You were a detective. Did there come

a time when you were assigned to a specific

detail, a surveillance detail, at the fire

station, Fire Station Number 2, on South Main

Street, between South Main and Mulberry

Street?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

298

A. Originally it wasn't an assignment.

It was one that I decided upon and that I had

noticed something that was unusual once upon

arriving at the Lorraine with Dr. King.

If I may continue, Inspector Smith

was in charge of security. When he asked me,

he said, well, you may go now. I noticed

there was nobody else there. In the past

when we were assigned to Dr. King, we stayed

with him, guarded him up the steps, down the

steps, and stayed with him. I saw nobody

with him.

So I went across the street and

asked the Fire Department could we come in

and observe from the rear, which we did.

Q. Who accompanied you in that --

A. Willie B. Richmond.

Q. What was his rank at that time?

A. As far as I know, patrolman.

Q. Which section of the department -- to

which section was he assigned? Where did he

work?

A. He was assigned with me at the time.

I didn't know where he came from.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

299

Q. So he worked with you. You didn't

know if he was from the intelligence section

or not?

A. No.

Q. So the two of you conducted this

oversight, this surveillance activity, of the

Lorraine Motel?

A. Yes.

Q. When did you take up your positions

there?

A. That was the same afternoon that we

had brought Dr. King in.

Q. That would have been the 3rd of

April?

A. Right.

Q. So you took up position in the fire

station on the 3rd of April and from the rear

of the fire station you were able to see the

Lorraine Motel quite clearly?

A. Right.

Q. Do you recall how late you worked on

that afternoon?

A. I really don't, no, sir.

Q. At some point, though, at the end of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

300

the day and the early evening was the

surveillance discontinued?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you return with officer Richmond

the next day?

A. The next day we returned.

Q. At what time did you start your

surveillance activities the next day?

A. I don't recall the time. It was

early, I'm sure. I don't know exactly.

Q. You started in the morning?

A. Oh, yes.

Q. In the course of that surveillance,

did you notice anything unusual going on over

at the Lorraine?

A. On one occasion again, I don't know

what day or what time it was, we saw the

Invaders leaving one of the rooms on one

occasion. We recognized Reverend Orange

going in at one time.

Q. You saw various activity happening or

taking place?

A. Right.

Q. Do you recall if there were any

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

301

out-of-state license plates?

A. The only one that I recognized was

the one that Reverend Orange was driving.

Q. Okay. How long did you remain on

duty in the course of that day?

A. As far as time goes, I really

don't --

Q. It is hard to reconstruct that, isn't

it? But fairly late in that afternoon is it

fair to say your activities were called to a

halt? You were removed from your -- is that

fair too say that you were removed at some

point fairly late in the afternoon?

A. Yes.

Q. Would you describe how that came

about, just how you were removed and did you

have any advance notice of it or what

happened?

A. Well, that morning I received a phone

call on the pay phone in the fire station,

and the voice on the other end was saying

that we're going to kill you. That's about

the size of that. I'd go back to where I

was. Later on that day Lieutenant Arkin came

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

302

by and stated I was needed at the

headquarters. I said, for what? He said,

well, director wants to see you.

Q. So late in the afternoon Lieutenant

Arkin from the intelligence division came by

the fire station?

A. Came down to get me.

Q. He came down to get you?

A. Right.

Q. He said you are needed down at

central headquarters?

A. Right.

Q. Did you have threats on your life

from time to time?

A. That's part of a policeman's job.

Q. Did you take them seriously?

A. Not really. If you do, you need to

resign. That's the way I felt.

Q. So it wasn't that unusual that you

would get that kind of -- have that kind of

threat?

A. Nothing unusual.

Q. Okay. Now, who was with Lieutenant

Arkin when he carried you down to central

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

303

headquarters?

A. He was alone.

Q. He was alone. Was he an officer to

whom you reported on a regular basis from

this assignment, as a result of this

assignment?

A. He wasn't one of the ones I would

directly report to. He worked in

intelligence.

Q. Okay. When you got down to central

headquarters, where did you go?

A. We went to the conference room.

Q. And who was in the conference room?

A. There were a group of men, I would

assume many of them law enforcement. Once we

arrived and got inside, Director Holloman

stated that there was a man there who had

just flown in and there was a contract on my

life and that they had prepared to send my

family to safety and that I was to go home.

At that point I told him that -- he knew as

well as I did that you couldn't stop a

contract and it was best for me to go back to

where I was and take care of my family.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

304

Q. What did Director Holloman say to

that?

A. We had a brief argumentation. He

said, well, you going home anyway, it is my

job to protect you, so, Lieutenant Arkin,

take him home.

Q. He didn't want to hear about your

objections?

A. No.

Q. Reflect carefully, Detective Redditt,

if you can. Who were the -- how many people

were in that conference room and what was the

nature of their positions, so far as you

could see?

A. When you get the word that someone

has a contract on you, you probably lose all

visions of what is going on around you. You

only know the room is full. In fact, I can't

even remember the face of the guy that was

standing there. I know he had on a checkered

coat and dark hair. That's about the only

thing I can remember about the guy that was

supposed to have flown in at that point.

Q. The man who relayed the information?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

305

A. Right.

Q. But beyond him did you notice any

military personnel in that room?

A. Well, if there was, they were not in

uniform. But the room was full.

Q. How do you know they were Army

personnel?

A. I said they may have been. They

wasn't in uniform. They may have been in the

room.

Q. Okay. Do you recall who the person

was who conveyed this threat, the information

about the threat on you?

A. I probably would if I heard the name

again. At that time I kind of -- like I say,

I lost all vision and my mind was wondering

about -- more so about my family than

anything else that the point.

Q. Did you learn where the threat came

from, where this information came from?

A. A couple of years ago.

Q. Now, would this person who conveyed

the threat, was he a local person?

A. I never seen him before. They say he

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

306

had flown in from the Washington D.C. and

said he was from the Secret Service Division.

Q. He had flown in from Washington and

he was from the Secret Service Division. He

was the one who told -- brought the

information about the threat on your life?

A. Right.

Q. The reason why they removed you?

A. That's correct.

Q. If I advice you that the records have

indicated that the person was a man named

Phillip Manuel, would that name ring a bell

with you?

A. Manual sounds familiar.

Q. What happened next?

A. We proceeded to my home in his

cruiser. I was waiting for the arrival of

those persons who were supposed to be my

security. While waiting there, the radio

blasted that Dr. King had been shot. I

jumped out of the car and ran in the house,

because my mother-in-law was in the bed sick

and I didn't want her to hear the news.

As I got inside the house, she

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

307

screamed out, Lord, take me, don't take Dr.

King, because we had forgot she had a small

transistor radio under her pillow. In fact,

she died a week later.

Q. Who was sitting in the car with you

at the time?

A. Lieutenant Arkin.

Q. By himself?

A. By himself.

Q. Had you just pulled up when the

news --

A. We had been there a brief time while

we was waiting on the guys to come.

Q. You had been there for a brief time

and were just waiting. What happened about

this threat? Did you go back to work?

A. I called about every hour to come

back to work. Thursday, Friday, Saturday.

Finally Sunday they said you can come on

back. I never heard anything else about it.

Q. You never heard anything else about

the threat?

A. No.

Q. No one ever mentioned it to you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

308

again?

A. Not again until two years ago.

Q. But did you ever question officially

anyone about this threat?

A. No. Someone mentioned, oh, it wasn't

you anyone, it was somebody in Knoxville,

Tennessee, that they had a contract on.

Q. It wasn't you, it was a mistaken

identity?

A. Right.

Q. It was someone in Knoxville,

Tennessee?

A. Then I heard again it was somebody in

St. Louis.

Q. Now, detective, you've had a lot of

years to think about this. Have you formed

any opinion about your removal from your post

on that afternoon of the murder?

A. Well, yes. I had a doubt about my

partner in the first place. It is unusual

getting somebody that you don't know anything

about to be assigned to you.

Number two, in that day there was

two men always worked together. Whatever

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

309

happened to one man would happen to the

other. So if you got a threat, both partners

got a threat.

I always wondered what happened to

him, why wasn't he removed, why wasn't he

taken a long with me. I never got that

answer. That has bothered me. Again, I felt

very strongly.

In fact, I told a couple of friends

of mine during that time that he was there to

spy on me in the first place.

Q. I see. Do you think you were removed

because you had certain ties and

relationships in the community and perhaps

were not trusted?

A. No. I think because I knew most of

the people in the community, that I may have

recognized someone that I shouldn't have

recognized. Or it has been discounted that

when you are with a partner, you make a

decision on what you are going to do if

certain things occur.

We had discussed briefly that he

would remain at the window if something

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

310

occurred and I would go out the door because

I was much faster, and if someone was

running, I could catch them or whatever. So

that was another thought we had in mind for

doing that.

MR. PEPPER: Okay. No further

questions hat this time.

THE COURT: All right.

Cross-examine.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Officer Redditt, I've talked to you

about this some time ago. I don't have too

many questions to ask you. But during the

time that you were there at the fire station,

you are aware that behind the rooming house

there were certain brush area and trees back

there?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you ever see any activity in

there where anyone was coming or going or

walking back in that area?

A. You could not really get -- it was so

grown-up at that time, it is on top of that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

311

hill there, it is possible somebody had come

up from the Huling side and gotten in there,

it is possible.

I think all my focus was really on

basically Mulberry Street itself and toward

the hotel itself. I very seldom looked into

that direction.

Q. Let me ask you, when you were taken

down by Lieutenant Arkin to the headquarters,

Director Holloman was there with some other

personnel?

A. Yes.

Q. Detective Redditt, did you know that

Director Holloman denied you were coming down

there until you actually arrived, were you

aware of that?

A. That's what I had heard.

Q. Did it seem to you he was surprised

when you got there?

A. No. It seemed like he was waiting

for me to get there, because when I walked

in, he pointed to the man standing there.

Q. You've been told since then that he

didn't know you were coming until you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

312

actually got there?

A. I've heard that.

Q. You've said I believe after you

learned that Dr. King had been assassinated

that Lieutenant Arkin was there with you.

Did he stay with you any more after that or

did he leave?

A. He left after Melvin Burgess and

Emmett Winters got there.

Q. How long did Director Burgess stay

there with you?

A. They stayed there during I guess --

again, I guess I did more looking out the

window than they did, I imagine.

Q. Did they stay the rest of the night?

A. Yes.

Q. They did. I believe when you and I

talked the first time, you told me something

had happened that was just hard for you to

take after this occurrence. Am I correct,

sir, personally?

A. I missed you.

Q. I believe you told me it was hard for

you to understand what had happened and hard

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

313

for you to absorb this personally.

A. Yes. It is very difficult.

MR. GARRISON: That's all.

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Just a word about the bushes in the

area that counsel asked you. Could you

describe that brush area as you recall it

around that point in time?

A. There is -- on Mulberry I guess you

could call it behind the buildings on Main

Street there is a high bank above the

sidewalk. And on that were a group of trees

that were there at that time.

Q. If you would cast your eyes over

here. Can you see this fairly well?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you see Mulberry Street here?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you see the sidewalk here?

A. Yes.

Q. Is this the area?

A. That's the area there.

Q. So it is behind Jim's Grill and the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

314

rooming house?

A. Right.

Q. This parking area and just north of

the fire station?

A. Yes.

Q. So this is the area that you are

talking about?

A. That's the area I'm speaking of this.

Q. This green area?

A. Yes.

Q. What was the nature of the shrubbery

and the bushes there?

A. Again, they were very -- the bank is

high and the trees are there.

Q. The bushes themselves were high?

A. Right.

Q. And thick?

A. Right.

MR. PEPPER: No further

questions. Thank you.

THE COURT: All right. If you

would call your next witness.

(Witness excused).

MR. PEPPER: Now we will call

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

315

Captain Jerry Williams.

JERRY WILLIAMS

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Captain Williams?

A. How do you do, sir.

Q. It is good to see you again and thank

you very much for coming down here.

A. My pleasure.

Q. Would you please for the record tell

us your full name and address?

A. My name is Jerry Dave Williams. I

live at 1095 Wild Leaf Cove, Memphis, Shelby

County.

Q. What is your current occupation,

Captain Williams?

A. Well, I'm involved currently in real

estate.

Q. Have you previously been a member of

the Memphis Police Department?

A. I sure have.

Q. How long were you a serving officer?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

316

A. Thirty-one years.

Q. From when to when?

A. January of 1949 until January of

1980.

Q. That's a long tour of duty, Captain.

A. About twenty years ago I retired.

Q. Yes. Could you tell us the various

positions that you've held and the various

tasks that you have filled as a serving

officer?

A. Well, initially I started off walking

Beale Street. I then was one of the first

black officers that were assigned, all of us

to Beale Street.

After several years we went into a

squad car and I worked the Orange Mound area,

that's East Memphis, Park and Airways, and

from there I was promoted up to fourteen

years to the detective bureau where I served

several years in the homicide bureau

investigating murders, rapes, aggravated

assaults.

Then I was transferred to vice and

narcotics, worked two or three years there.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

317

Then I worked the larceny bureau. Then after

I was made captain, I was assigned to the

West Precinct.

Q. When were you promoted to captain?

A. 1979.

Q. What were you doing in 1967, 1968?

A. At that time I was assigned to

homicide and I would be in charge of security

for the police department whenever we would

have celebrities or some dignitaries to come

to Memphis.

Q. So you were in charge of that

security operation with respect to

dignitaries when they came to Memphis?

A. Yes.

Q. And that would be in 1967, 1968?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. That period of time?

A. Yes.

Q. Were you on that detail earlier as

well?

A. Well, about 1967, until around 1971,

most of the dignitaries who would come to

Memphis, the police would have a security

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

318

detail to make sure that their safety would

be taken care of while they were here in

Memphis.

Q. Right. But were you on a special

security detail as early as the mid-1960's,

in 1965 or 1966?

A. I believe my assignment to security

was probably 1966. We're going back over

thirty years.

Q. That's all right.

A. To my memory, around July of 1966,

which involved my first security assignment,

which was James Meredith when he came to

Memphis on his walk to Mississippi.

Q. Captain Williams, were you assigned

to provide security for Dr. Martin Luther

King whenever he came to Memphis?

A. Well, for the first two times that he

came, to my knowledge, I was assigned. On

the third time I was not.

Q. Well, Dr. King, of course, didn't

come to Memphis -- didn't visit the city a

great number of times, anyway.

A. Not to my knowledge.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

319

Q. But when he did come, when you are

saying the first two times, what year are we

talking about? Are we talking about the year

of the assassination?

A. The year of the assassination, 1968.

Q. And tell us how you would put

together -- how that security unit that you

headed would be put together.

A. To the best of my knowledge Reverend

Ben Hooks was a member of SCLC, and he was on

the board I believe of SCLC. The SCLC office

headquarters in Atlanta would notify Reverend

Ben Hooks, and he, in turn, would call the

police department to ask for security.

Inspector Don Smith was the overall

security supervisor. He would call me and

ask me to select a group of officers to serve

for security on those occasions.

Q. How large a team would you put

together?

A. Possibly nine. I would have about

six detectives, three uniformed men, and if

there would be a woman in the entourage, I

would have a female officer.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

320

Q. And would you stay with Dr. King

throughout his visit when he was in Memphis?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. How would you protect him? How would

you provide security for him?

A. Well, we would get his itinerary when

he would come to Memphis. We would meet him

at the airport when he landed, we would be

right with him. We would follow him to his

hotel. If he would go to church first, we

would lead the detail to the church.

Whenever these meetings were over

with, we would find out what hotel he would

be staying at. We would never advise him to

stay at the Lorraine because we couldn't

furnish proper security there.

Q. We understand he used to visit the

Lorraine for meetings but never stayed there

overnight.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Where did he stay overnight when he

was in Memphis on the times when you were

protecting him?

A. On one occasion he stayed at the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

321

Rivermont. It was the Rivermont on

Riverside, the Rivermont Hotel. I think it

has changed now. But that's where he stayed.

Q. Your unit would protect him and

provide security there?

A. Yes, sir. We would go in and check

the rooms, make sure the telephone wasn't

bugged, check under the beds, check

everywhere. Then I would assign two officers

on the outside of his door. We would take

turns about every two hours. We would do

that all night long.

Q. Now, on Dr. King's last visit to

Memphis, he arrived on the 3rd of April,

Wednesday, the 3rd of April, 1968. Were you

asked to form this usual security unit to

protect him?

A. No, sir.

Q. You were not?

A. I was not.

Q. Why were you not asked to perform

that security unit on his last visit to

Memphis?

A. Sir, I don't know. I was just told

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

322

that somebody else would handle the

assignment.

Q. Are you aware of any security that

was provided for him during that visit?

A. To the best of my knowledge, there

were two other officers from my office, the

homicide office, that was assigned.

Q. How large a unit was provided?

A. I don't know. I just know of the two

officers who left homicide on the assignment.

Q. Were they black officers?

A. They were white officers.

Q. They were white officers. But your

black unit -- this security unit was a unit

of black homicide officers, wasn't it?

A. Sir, I just don't know. I know I

wasn't assigned on that particular day I

worked in the office.

Q. You were not assigned on that

particular day. But the usual unit that you

formed consisted of whom?

A. Well, Wendell Robinson, William

Harris, and I would have some uniformed men.

Some of them are no longer on the force. But

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

323

three uniformed men that I could rely on, I

could call on for their assistance. And I

had four detectives.

Usually I would have -- I don't know

if -- as I said, it has been a long time. I

just can't name those people. But I would

have four detectives, three uniformed men and

one female officer, to the best of my

knowledge.

Q. Were they all black officers?

A. All black officers.

Q. And the last time he visited, none of

that unit, no one on that unit, certainly

under your command, anyway, was assigned?

A. No, sir, they were not assigned, to

my knowledge.

Q. Did you ever ask any questions as to

why you weren't assigned?

A. Well, I did later on after my

retirement. I had a talk with my inspector,

who also had retired. I felt he had no

reason to hold anything from me. I asked

him. He said that we frankly wasn't asked to

handle the security. I asked the question,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

324

we wasn't asked by whom? He said by somebody

in Dr. King's entourage. That's the way it

was. That's the way he left it.

Q. Were you satisfied with that answer?

A. Well, it was an answer. I hadn't

gotten anything before that time. That was

some twenty years later. No, eighteen years,

at least, afterwards. We happened to have a

conversation about it. I was curious as to

why, from day one, I was taken off. That

bothered me, even to this day.

Q. Particularly since he was

assassinated on that visit?

A. That's right.

Q. But after the assassination, in the

aftermath of the assassination while you were

still a serving officer, did you ever raise

that question with anybody inside the

department?

A. No.

Q. You didn't at that time?

A. Ug-huh. We talked amongst ourselves,

we black officers, and we had different

versions as to why, but nobody knew why, you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

325

know.

Q. You just know that it didn't happen?

A. You have to realize at that time

thirty-one years ago, maybe -- Memphis was

very segregated. There was a lot of

hostility here. The situation has changed

dramatically since then. Black people was

only talking to black people, only -- white

people only talking to white people. There

was a lot of hostility here.

You could not -- I remember just

like it was yesterday when Dr. King was

assassinated. Because I went to the scene.

I took the camera down there to make

pictures. I wasn't on the assignment, but

the inspector had asked me to bring the

camera down to make the pictures.

I brought the camera down so the

photographer for the police department could

make the pictures at the scene. And it seems

to me I could see the hostility, the hatred,

on a lot of the officers faces.

When we left, when I left the scene

from where Dr. King was assassinated, I went

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

326

immediately out to St. Joseph Hospital. And

there I saw his body lying on the slab in the

emergency room. The doctors had tried all

they could to massage his heart, get his

heart back, but he had been cut open. We

could see the damage that had been done by

the shot that he received.

But I mention that it seems to me,

as I said, it seems to me a long time ago,

there was some at least a hundred police

officers who was lined up on the street from

the police department north to St. Joseph

Hospital where Dr. King's body was carried,

and only one officer came up to me and

expressed any type of sympathy, a white

officer, that is. I never will forget that.

It did make me feel a lot better.

But I don't know why we were pulled

off. I just know -- I don't know if the

answer the inspector has gave me was a true

answer or not. I just know that we wasn't

working on that day on the assignment.

Q. And you were not in a position as an

officer in the department as a black officer

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

327

to really be able to ask anybody and require

an answer, were you?

A. That's correct.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further,

Your Honor. I pass the witness.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, I

have no questions of Captain Williams. Thank

you.

(Witness excused.)

(Bench conference outside the

presence of the court reporter.)

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor, at

point in the proceedings plaintiff would like

to read into the record two interview

statements, one conducted by a Federal Bureau

of Investigation officer and the other

conducted by a Memphis Police Department

officer of a man we believe is long deceased,

I've tried to find him for over twenty years,

named Solomon Jones, who was Dr. King's

chauffeur at the time and was present at the

scene when Dr. King was assassinated, with

the Court's permission.

THE COURT: All right, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

328

MR. PEPPER: This is what is

known as an FBI 302. It is a statement that

FBI agents take when they interview

witnesses. They fill it out and sign it.

The signing officer is Special Agent

Eugene G. Douglass, with two S's, and it was

taken on April 12th, 1968.

Mr. Solomon Jones, Jr., 374 Vance

Avenue, Memphis. He was employed as a

funeral director for R. S. Lewis & Sons at

the same address. They interviewed him at

the Lorraine Motel, 406 Mulberry, Memphis.

Mr. Jones advised he had been

serving as a chauffeur for Dr. Martin Luther

King, Jr., on Dr. King's last trip to

Memphis. He believed he had started driving

for Dr. King on April 1, 1968. He stated

that the Reverend James Lawson of Memphis had

requested him to drive Dr. King while he was

in Memphis.

On Wednesday night, April 3rd, 1968,

Dr. King spoke at the Mason Temple in

Memphis, and after the speech returned to the

Lorraine Motel. Dr. King told him to report

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

329

back to the Lorraine Motel on Thursday

morning, April 4, 1968, at eight-thirty a.m.

Dr. King was due to go to court in regard to

a restraining order on that morning.

Mr. Jones stated that on Thursday

morning, April 4th, he returned to the

Lorraine Motel at about eight-thirty a.m. He

stated that this motel is located on the east

side of Mulberry and is bordered on the north

by Huling and on the south by East Butler.

He advised that he parked the car

which was used to drive Dr. King and which

car was a 1967 Cadillac and belonged to the

R. S. Lewis & Sons Funeral Home in the

parking area of the Lorraine Motel and in

front of Room 207. The car was headed into

the motel area, which would have been in an

easterly direction. So it was facing into

the motel.

A short time after he arrived,

Reverend Andrew young, an associate of Dr.

King, contacted Jones and stated that Dr.

King was not going to go to court on the

morning of April 4, 1996, and Young was going

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

330

to Court. Reverend Young informed Jones that

he was to remain at the motel as Dr. King was

to later that day address the sanitation

workers.

Jones advised that he remained at

the Lorraine Motel and ate his lunch at the

hotel. At about three p.m. Memphis time the

Reverend Billy Kyles, a minister in Memphis,

informed Jones that Dr. King and other

members of his staff were going to have

dinner at his home at about five p.m. on

April 4th, 1968.

Mr. Jones stated that Dr. King did

not leave the motel area the entire day of

April 4, 1968, and Jones stated that he also

stayed in that area the entire day. He

advised that Dr. King and his group did not

leave the motel at five p.m. as had been

originally mentioned to him by Reverend

Kyles, and at approximately six p.m. on April

4, 1968, Jones noticed Dr. King come out of a

room on the balcony level of the motel, which

room was north -- he said was to the north of

Room 306 where he was residing.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

331

Dr. King proceeded to Room 306, and

as he was about to enter the room, Dr. King

told Jones to start the car, as they were

preparing to go to dinner. Jones started the

car, and Dr. King went into Room 306 where he

was staying with Reverend Abernathy.

Dr. King came out of Room 306 a

short time later and was standing on the

balcony area in front of Room 306. At this

time Dr. King was fully dressed. Dr. King

was looking from the balcony level down to

Jones, who was standing beside the car on the

ground level.

Jones advised the car was still

parked in front of Room 207. Dr. King was

talking to Jones about the weather, and Jones

stated he told Dr. King he should put on a

topcoat, as it was cold outside. He stated

that he was looking up at Dr. King during

this conversation, and Dr. King was facing

west and that he, Jones, was facing east.

Dr. King acknowledged Jones

concerning obtaining his topcoat. Jones

stated that while he was looking at Dr. King,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

332

he heard a sound which he thought was a

firecracker. Dr. King fell to the floor of

the walkway in front of Room 306.

At this point Jones could see blood

coming from Dr. King and realized the sound

was actually a shot rather than a

firecracker. Jones stated that he started

screaming and calling for help and repeatedly

called several times "Dr. King has been

shot."

He advised that at the time of the

shooting that Jesse Jackson, a member of the

staff of Dr. King's, was standing at Room

305. He also recalled that Dr. King's lawyer

by the name of Eskridge of Chicago, Illinois,

was standing near Jones on the ground level.

On seeing Dr. King bleeding and

realizing that he was shot, Jones stated that

he and Eskridge did not run to the side of

Dr. King, as others were coming to Dr. King's

aid. However, he and Eskridge turned west,

since that was the direction in which the

shot had originated, and went toward Mulberry

Street, which street is located on the front

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

333

portion of the motel.

They ran about fifty feet and

stopped opposite the office of the motel.

Jones stated he and the lawyer both then

looked around and saw nothing. Jones stated

he ran about another ten feet west and

stopped at the edge of the sidewalk in front

of the motel and stood beside a brick wall.

He stated that Eskridge also ran up

to the same area opposite him. He advised

when he reached this point he looked opposite

to the point where he was standing, which was

also the driveway area. He looked opposite

the driveway area toward the west side of

Mulberry Street. This area has a large

retaining wall.

Immediately above the retaining wall

is a grassy area with shrubs and bushes.

This area is behind some buildings facing

South Main Street. He got a quick glimpse of

a person with his back toward Mulberry

Street. He estimated the person he glimpsed

would have been approximately sixty feet from

where he was standing.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

334

He pointed out it was dusk dark and

he merely got a quick glimpse of someone in

the area. He stated that it was the back of

this individual and he could not tell whether

the person was negro or white. This person

was moving rather fast, and he recalls that

he believed he was wearing some sort of

light-colored jacket with some sort of hood

or parka.

He stated that this person appeared

to him to be about five feet eleven or a

little taller. He did not see him carrying

anything in his hand and did not notice

anything concerning the dress below his

waist. He said he could not tell anything

further about this individual and that it

could have been an officer, but he could not

furnish any further details concerning this

individual.

Then it simply continues by saying

he was in a state of shock and someone put

him in Room 308 and he had to lie down. He

drove the car which had been used for Dr.

King to follow the ambulance to the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

335

hospital. In the car with him was Reverend

Andrew Young and Bernard Lee.

Now, the second interview is with a

Memphis Police Department detective, R. R.

Davis. It was taken on Thursday, April 4th,

as well.

Moving away from all of the

introductory material down to the relevant

part of his observation, Detective Davis

said: You mentioned that the direction of

the shot came from across the street, meaning

the west side of Mulberry. What leads you to

believe this vicinity is where the shot came

from?

Answer: After the shot and Dr. King

fell, instead of me going up to where Dr.

King was, I ran to the street to see if I

could see somebody, and I could see

somebody. I could see a person leaving the

thicket on the west side of Mulberry with his

back to me, looked to me like he had a hood

over his head, and that's all that I could

see.

Question: Can you describe in more

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

336

detail this person that you saw?

No, sir, I cannot.

Was this person leaving hurriedly?

Answer: In a hurry.

Question: In order to clarify this

hood that you mentioned, can you describe it

in some detail?

Answer: The only thing that I could

see was something fitting close around his

shoulders and was white in color.

Question: Could you tell if this

person was carrying anything in his hands?

No, sir, I could not.

Question: How close to the street

was this man when you first observed him?

Answer: He was a few feet west of

the retainer wall in the brushes and was

going west toward Main Street when I first

noticed him.

Question: Prior to the shooting,

were you outside around this area where you

possibly could have seen a suspicious type of

person hanging around or passing by the

Lorraine Motel?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

337

Answer: The only thing that I saw

was a squad car passing with four men in it,

and they were driving slow and they were

looking toward the Lorraine Motel and they

were cruising real slow, and in a few minutes

after -- they had passed by, and a few

minutes after they had passed by, the

incident happened.

Question: In regards to the

description on the above-mentioned man

wearing the hood, describe in detail all you

can about the clothing and physical status.

Answer: It looked to me like he had

on a one-piece jacket and hood, and it

appeared to be of white material. He

appeared to be a small person and he was

moving real rapidly. I could not describe

his clothing below the jacket. I did not

observe any car of a suspicious nature around

this area and did not watch to see if this

man attempted to enter a car, because I then

turned back to Dr. King.

That concludes those two statements

of Solomon Jones.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

338

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiffs will call next Professor Phillip

Melanson.

THE COURT: All right. Maybe we

ought to take about ten minutes.

(Jury out.)

(Short recess.)

THE COURT: All right. Bring

the jury in.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: All right. Call

your next witness.

PHILLIP M. MELANSON

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Professor Melanson.

A. Good afternoon.

Q. Would you state your full name and

address for the record, please.

A. Phillip M. Melanson, 18 Partridge

Place, Marion, Massachusetts.

Q. What is your occupation,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

339

Mr. Melanson?

A. I'm a professor of political science

and an author.

Q. How long have you been a professor of

political science?

A. Twenty-eight years.

Q. Have you had a particular interest in

any special area of American history or

political science?

A. Yes. Political violence and

assassination is my main area of expertise.

I've written thirteen books, including one on

the U.S. Secret Service and how they protect

presidents.

Q. Have you in the course of your work

considered the assassination of Martin Luther

King?

A. Yes, sir, I have.

Q. When did you do some research and

investigation of the assassination of Martin

Luther King?

A. Approximately between 1980 and 1990.

Q. Could you tell us some of the -- the

nature of some of the investigative work that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

340

you did and research that you did?

A. Yes. I read the complete files as

available of the FBI and whatever Memphis

Police documents were released. I

interviewed crime scene witnesses and law

enforcement officers here and in Canada who

had a connection with the case in arresting

Mr. Ray or in investigating the crime scene

and talked to as many people as I could find.

Q. How long would you say you devoted --

how much time would you say you devoted to

this investigation, this effort?

A. Well, I was carrying on my normal

academic duties, but I think it is probably

fair to say that five years of those ten

years, the working hours were probably

devoted to researching Dr. King's

assassination.

Q. And you published a work on this

case?

A. Yes.

Q. What was the name of that work?

A. The Martin Luther King Assassination.

Q. When was it published?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

341

A. That was published in 1988. There

have been several subsequent editions of the

book with additional material.

Q. Now, Professor Melanson, you've

stated that your work took you -- your

investigative work on this case took you to

Memphis?

A. Yes.

Q. And that you interviewed a number of

people, including law enforcement officers?

A. Yes.

Q. Was one of the officers who you

interviewed a Memphis Police Department

inspector named Samuel Evans?

A. Yes, sir, it was.

Q. What is Inspector Sam Evans'

significance in this case? Just generally

what was his role in the police department,

what is the significance that you have seen?

A. The avenue that I was researching was

that inspector Evans was the commander of the

Memphis Police Force Tactical Units or Tact

Squads. He was in charge of their mobility

and deploying them. I was particularly

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

342

interested in what had happened to them at

the time of the assassination.

Q. All right. Now, would you just

describe for the Court and the jury what is a

tactical unit and what was the tact squad?

A. Well, I use "unit" and "squad"

interchangeably. The Memphis Police

Department specifically for Dr. King's visit

formed six tactical units that they had not

formed before. And they were essentially

riot control units consisting of three to

four vehicles, police vehicles, with two to

three officers in each vehicle, and there

were six of these tactical units formed, four

of which were deployed around the Lorraine

Motel.

Q. Now, when you say they were deployed

around the Lorraine Motel, this is the

Lorraine Motel. Can you see this?

(Indicating diagram on easel.)

A. Yes.

Q. Where would they have been deployed?

Would they have taken up residence in the

lobby? Do you have a sense of where they

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

343

were in the motel area?

A. From reading the documents and in

talking with Inspector Evans, most of them

were intended to be mobile, and their orders

were to be within a five-block radius of the

Lorraine Motel because their central concern

was Dr. King and his party. And so their

presence was specifically for him. That's

why they were going to include this tight, if

you will, law enforcement net around the

Lorraine.

Q. Right. Was there a particular unit,

a Tact 10, that was actually based at the

Lorraine Motel at that time? Do you recall?

A. I'm not sure my information speaks to

Tact 10 being based at the hotel. I know

that they were in the firehouse, but I don't

have that information.

Q. Right. But before they were in the

firehouse, they were in the proximity of the

Lorraine Motel?

A. Tact 10, yes.

Q. Now, did you become aware of -- did

you ask Inspector Evans how they were removed

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

344

to the fire station or what caused them to be

removed from the area of the Lorraine Motel

to the fire station?

A. Well, my understanding from Inspector

Evans and from the documents was that on

April 3rd and up and to the morning of April

4th, the day of the assassination, the four

deployed tactical units with approximately

ten or twelve cars were in various locations

within a five-block radius of the Lorraine,

including proximity to the Lorraine and the

firehouse and other specific areas. They

were all within that block area as ordered.

On the morning of the assassination,

the order came for the tactical units to be

withdrawn outside of a five-block area,

therefore, disbursing them at a much greater

distance and removing their presence from the

immediate what would become the assassination

scene.

Q. So there was an order on the morning

of the assassination that yet another level

of security for Martin Luther King be

removed?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

345

A. Yes.

Q. Who gave that order?

A. The order was given by Inspector Sam

Evans. He not only told that to me in the

interview, but he is on record as having said

in the House Select Committee report that he

in fact ordered those tactical units to be

removed. They were under his command. He

gave the order.

Q. Inspector Evans, as an aside, is

deceased at this time?

A. Correct.

Q. And he informed you that he gave the

order that these units be withdrawn, be

removed or be pulled back?

A. Yes. He referred to them as "his

units," yes.

Q. What reason did he give you for

removing these units?

A. He told me that he had been requested

by a member of Dr. King's party to remove the

units from proximity to the Lorraine Motel.

Q. He received a request from a member

of Dr. King's party to remove the units?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

346

A. Yes.

Q. Did he say which member of Dr. King's

party made this request?

A. That's the question I asked him. He

immediately responded that it was the

Reverend Samuel Kyles.

Q. The Reverend Samuel Kyles requested

that the security forces, the tact forces

around the Lorraine Motel, be removed?

A. Yes.

Q. Was the Reverend Samuel Kyles -- did

he have any position or anything to do with

the Southern Christian Leadership Conference?

A. Not to my awareness. I think

politically he was more of a local person in

Memphis politics.

Q. He was a local pastor?

A. Yes.

Q. So you are telling us, Professor

Melanson, that Inspector Evans was telling

you that a local pastor's request was behind

the removal of this security umbrella for Dr.

Martin Luther King, Jr.?

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

347

Q. As one who was looked into these

matters, does it make sense to you that

police department security in a time like

this would be determined by a local pastor's

request?

A. It makes no sense to me whatsoever in

terms of law enforcement chain of command or

in terms of what I understood to be the

duties and responsibilities of everyone

involved.

Q. But yet when you asked him that

question, he didn't hesitate, he said that

this is why he acceded. Did he say why he

acceded? Did he say he disagreed or he

thought he had to do this? Did he give any

reason for that at all?

A. No. He simply said that request had

come and they had honored the request.

Q. On the day of the assassination?

A. The morning of the assassination.

Q. The morning of the assassination?

A. Yes.

MR. WILLIAMS: No further

questions.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

348

MR. GARRISON: I don't have any

questions for this witness.

THE COURT: All right. You may

stand down, sir. You can remain in the

courtroom or you are free to leave.

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: Your next witness.

MS. ATKINS-HILL: Your Honor, at

this time we'd like to read the transcribed

statement of Kaye Pittman Black. It was

transcribed in the documentary trial in

1993. She was sworn, but this was not a

formal legal proceeding, Your Honor. The

statement was sworn testimony.

THE COURT: All right. Go ahead

and read.

MS. ATKINS-HILL: Okay.

Starting at page 2018 --

THE COURT: Read her name into

the record for the --

MS. ATKINS-HILL: Her name is

Kaye Pittman Black.

THE COURT: Pittman is spelled

P I T T --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

349

MS. ATKINS-HILL: It is

P I T T M A N.

THE COURT: Go ahead.

MS. ATKINS-HILL:

Question: What is your present

occupation?

Answer: I'm administrative

assistant to Sheriff A. C. Gillis.

Question: What was your occupation

back in 1968?

Answer: I was a reporter, civil

rights reporter, basically at that time.

Question: For which newspaper?

Answer: The Memphis Press

Scimitar. It closed in 1983.

Question: All right, Ms. Black, how

long had you been a reporter at that time?

Answer: 26 years about, but

twenty-one years with the Press Scimitar.

Line 13.

Question: Were you familiar with

the issues of the sanitation strike?

Answer: Very definitely.

Question: Did you cover that on a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

350

regular basis?

Answer: Yes. I also helped out at

city hall to Mr. Porteous, who was the senior

reporter at city hall. And I assisted him.

So I knew both sides. Mostly I was on the

street at the sanitation strike. I would go

to Clayborn Temple every day in March.

Were you known and familiar with

political leaders of Memphis at that time?

The top of page 2020.

Answer: Yes.

Question: Did you, for example,

know former Mayor William Ingram?

Answer: Very well.

Question: How long had you known

Mayor Ingram?

Answer: I would say from the time

of his election, which was -- I moved here in

1962 to go to work. It would have been after

that period. I can't remember when he was

elected. I don't have a date available

without a newspaper, so I can't tell you.

But it was prior to the sanitation strike.

Mayor Henry lobe was mayor at the time of the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

351

strike.

Question: Without telling us

exactly what was said, but did you have a

telephone conversation with Mayor Ingram on

morning of April the 5th?

Answer: Yes, I did. He called

somewhere between I would say seven and ten.

The reason I say seven is most of us had been

up all night. A lot of us came in at seven,

some had gone home. So it would have been

between seven and ten.

Question: And as a result of that

conversation, did you go over to the South

Main Street area?

Answer: Yes.

Question: Where did you go and what

did you observe at the South Main Street

area?

Top of page 2021.

Answer: The trees which lined the

embankment behind the rooming house and which

would have overlooked the Lorraine Motel had

been cut and the area had been cleared and

cleaned. Line 20.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

352

Question: Would you show us the

area where the trees that you are talking

about were located?

Answer: They would have been --

this faces the Lorraine back, the back of the

rooming house, correct?

Question: That's the rooming

house. That's the back area of the rooming

house there.

Answer: This is where the

embankment would have been where the trees

would have been. It overlooks the Lorraine.

In other words, someone here up in the

rooming house would have had to look down to

the Lorraine because the embankment was

taller than me, which means, you know, which

I'm not very tall, but it would have been six

or eight feet tall. I think it was a

concrete embankment holding up the back of

the building.

Line 16.

Now, you received this call on the

morning of April the 5th?

Answer: Right.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

353

Question: And at what time did you

go down to that area and make that

observation?

Answer: I'm going by a long memory,

but I remember telling the city editor about

it, and he said, I'm pretty sure I went out

right after home edition, and home edition

was twelve o'clock deadline. So it would

have been probably oneish. I wouldn't have

gone out before home edition, which meant it

would have been in the next day's paper,

which edition, I couldn't tell you, but I

remember city hall. The city hall reporter

had gotten a statement from city hall saying

that a sanitation crew cleaned it up to make

it look better for all the people coming into

town.

Question: Had you been down in that

area before a number of --

Answer: Every day.

Question: Every day?

Answer: Every day.

Question: Were you then quite

familiar with the way the area looked?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

354

Answer: Very familiar, right, very

familiar.

Question: And you were thus able to

ascertain that there had been a cutting?

Answer: There was a total

demolishing almost. It was just scrubs. It

wasn't any fine trees or anything. There

were willows and scrub ash and stuff like

that.

Dr. Pepper: No further questions.

There was a recross, page 2024, line 1 --

line 2.

Mrs. Black, did you say it was a

total cleaning? Were there any trees left

standing? Answer, there were probably

pieces, you know. They topped a lot of

them. They just topped a lot of them and

some they trimmed. They were trying to clean

it up, they said.

THE COURT: All right. Your

next order of proof?

MR. PEPPER: I think that will

do it for today, Your Honor. Apparently they

have located one witness who is due here, but

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

355

he is probably ten minutes away. I think is

probably not useful to delay the Court that

period of time. If we can just resume in the

morning.

THE COURT: All right. Ladies

and gentlemen, I know how mad it is going to

make you, but we're going to stop at this

point. We will resume tomorrow again at ten

o'clock. I remind you don't discuss this

matter among yourselves or with anyone else

until you start your deliberations.

All right, Mr. James.

(The proceedings were adjourned

at 4:07 p.m.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

356

IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF SHELBY COUNTY,

TENNESSEE FOR THE THIRTIETH JUDICIAL

DISTRICT AT MEMPHIS

_______________________________________________

CORETTA SCOTT KING, et al,

Plaintiffs,

Vs. Case No. 97242

LOYD JOWERS, et al,

Defendants.

_______________________________________________

PROCEEDINGS

November 18th, 1999

VOLUME IV

_______________________________________________

Before the Honorable James E. Swearengen,

Division 4, judge presiding.

_______________________________________________

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI,

RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

COURT REPORTERS

Suite 2200, One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

(901) 529-1999

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

357

- APPEARANCES -

For the Plaintiff: DR. WILLIAM PEPPER

Attorney at Law

New York City, New York

For the Defendant:

MR. LEWIS GARRISON

Attorney at Law

Memphis, Tennessee

Court Reported by:

MR. BRIAN F. DOMINSKI

Certificate of Merit

Registered Professional

Reporter

Daniel, Dillinger,

Dominski, Richberger &

Weatherford

22nd Floor

One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

358

- INDEX -

WITNESS: PAGE/LINE NUMBER

JAMES LAWSON

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER........................ 360 20

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON...................... 442 8

MAYNARD STILES

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 445 5

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:..................... 451 5

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 452 1

OLIVIA CATLIN

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 453 4

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:..................... 467 3

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 477 7

RECROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:..................... 479 12

ED ATKINSON

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 487 16

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

359

HASEL HUCKABY

PREVIOUS TESTIMONY READ............... 480 14

JAMES LESAR

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 496 7

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:..................... 503 19

ANDREW YOUNG

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 507 21

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:..................... 531 18

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 535 3

EXHIBIT PAGE/LINE

Exhibits 2 and 3 respectively........ 502 7

Exhibit 4............................ 536 17

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

360

PROCEEDINGS

(November 18th, 10:20 a.m.)

THE COURT: All right. Bring

the jury out, Mr. James.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: Before we begin, let

me explain that Mr. Jowers has my permission

to be absent this morning. We're going to

continue with the proof.

All right. You may proceed.

MR. PEPPER: Good morning, Your

Honor.

THE COURT: Good morning.

MR. PEPPER: Plaintiffs call as

their first witness Reverend James Lawson.

JAMES LAWSON

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good morning, Reverend Lawson.

A. Good morning.

Q. Thank you very much for coming here

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

361

this morning.

A. You are welcome.

Q. In fairness to you, I know you've

just gotten off a plane from Los Angeles and

come directly into the courtroom.

A. Right.

Q. If at any time you feel a bit woozy

or you want a break, perhaps we could ask and

his Honor will indulge. It has been awhile

since you slept.

A. Thank you. Yeah.

Q. Would you please state your full name

and address for the record.

A. James M. Lawson, Jr., 4521 Don

Timatayo Drive, Los Angeles, 90008.

Q. What is your profession?

A. I've been a pastor for forty-five

years.

Q. And what was your most recent

pastorship?

A. I just retired as pastor from Holeman

United Methodist Church in Los Angeles.

Q. And prior to that charge where were

you, sir?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

362

A. I was for twelve years pastor at

Centenary United Methodist Church here in

Memphis, Tennessee.

Q. Would you tell the jury where you

were trained and what your background has

been.

A. Well, I'm a third-generation clergy

person, and I did my college work at Bolden

Wallace College in Moorea, Ohio, my

theological work at Olin Graduate School of

Theology at Vanderbilt University of

Nashville and Boston University.

Q. When did you first meet Martin Luther

King?

A. About February the 6th or 7th of

1957. I was a graduate student in theology

at Olin College in Ohio. Martin King came

there to spend a day of talking to the

university and to the community. I was in a

small luncheon at noon time with him. We had

a chance to be alone. So we visited and

talked and found ourselves to be very much in

sync with one another as people.

Q. What was it that made you feel

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

363

compatible in terms of viewing the world and

the problems and the issues of the day with

Martin King?

A. Well, he had just completed the

Montgomery bus boycott, which had begun

December 1st, 1955. And it had just finished

in January of 1957, and it was successful.

It was the first almost -- I think it could

be said it was the first major non-violent

direct action movement in at least the 1950's

in the United States and one of the largest

and most powerful. The ripples went all

across the world.

At the time I was serving as a coach

and campus minister in Nog Por, India, and I

first saw the story on the front pages of the

newspapers. It was on the BBC. It was on

all the radio stations then in India. So it

was a world-wide story.

I had been a non-violent

practitioner since about age ten or eleven.

I had studied it and had worked on issues

against racism in the United States as a

college student and as a graduate student.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

364

So I had a background of both practical

experience and the theory.

Of course, being in India I followed

the work of Mahatma Gandi at length, and I

told Martin King of this experience, and that

was one of the things that linked us very

closely. While in college, at the end of the

1940's, I had wanted to -- I had decided I

should work in the South, that there was a

clear call for me to work in the South to try

to apply creative non-violence to the

eradication of racism and segregation.

So I mentioned this to him. Dr.

King said, well, don't wait, come now, we

need you. So, consequently, I changed any

plans and sped up my calendar to finish up my

schooling and go south.

Q. We've called you as a background

witness in terms of the whole aspect of

Martin King's work that led you here to

Memphis. So you are a bit out of sync, but

because of scheduling, we brought you in here

at this point in time to have you talk about

these things. You knew Dr. King from 1957 to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

365

the time he died. Is that correct?

A. Yes, right.

Q. How did you see him change as a

preacher and as a leader during that period

of time?

A. Well, there are lots of ways. In the

first instance he had planned basically

probably with his life to become a preacher

and then the president of a college or

university. That's why he had done a Ph.D.

in theology at Boston University.

So he expected to follow in the

pathway of two or three people who were

friends of his father, Benjamin Mayes of

Moorehouse College being one of these and

Howard Thurman of Howard University. Those

were his models.

The Montgomery bus boycott during

his first pastorate in Montgomery in a sense

shook his vocational understanding of where

he was going and what he was to do. He did a

lot of wrestling with all of that, what this

meant for his life.

As a consequence, that in itself

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

366

kept him in the journey and making some

changes. He had not anticipated that he

would become overnight a spokesperson for

liberty and justice, for the gospel in a

particular way, which meant, therefore, he

did a lot of maturing very quickly.

He had an excellent mind, and he --

as he got into the struggle, he began to

recognize more and more what this would

entail. Among those things was his

recognition that the issue of racism and

segregation in the United States was not kind

of a limited affair, it affected economics,

it affected not only human relations itself,

it affected the politics of the nation.

That's obviously the case. It was a

very violent institution, as it still is in

the United States. So this broadened his

whole childhood and then young adulthood

estimation of what racism was about and what

this was going to involve.

Then he also saw this as a life's

vocation, not as kind of a limited kind of

career but was a high calling of God. And

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

367

this matured him in many ways. He was a deep

reader and thinker.

So one saw the way in which his

knowledge of the United States, his knowledge

of the struggle, increased rather rapidly.

His exposure to all kinds of platforms and

radio interviews and television interviews

sharpened up his intellectual ability to not

only analyze the situation but to respond to

a great variety of challenges.

The threats on his life that began

almost immediately in Montgomery made him

very aware of how fragile his life was, but

it also made him profoundly aware of how

dangerous the struggle was and also how he

had to have the spiritual and moral fortitude

to work through it and live through it.

Q. Did you have much conversation with

him or discussion with him in the early and

mid-1960's as he moved to become concerned of

international issues, particularly the war in

Vietnam?

A. Oh, yes. In our workshops and staff

meetings and personal conversations he was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

368

always -- he always had a broad sense of the

whole world. His understanding and

commitment to non-violence was broad also.

In my workshops on non-violence,

which I did with him and around the South

especially for SCLC and for the Fellowship of

Reconciliation, we always included what was

going on especially 1960 in Angola and

Mozambique as an illustration.

I had colleagues in the Methodist

Church who were pastors from those countries,

and they were being thrown in jail by the

Portuguese government with the good wishes of

the CIA in the United States and the

connivance of the State Department and so

forth.

So I brought these things into it.

Mondo Mondo Laney was a Ph.D. from

Northwestern University and a Methodist and

one of the organizers of the

self-determination movement in Mozambique.

In my work shops I brought these movements

into the picture so people could understand

what was going on.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

369

Vietnam, we watched it escalate in

1960. We had any number of staff conferences

in our -- staff meetings, rather, and

retreats. We talked about these matters

steadily. I don't think there was hardly

anyone in SCLC who thought that the Vietnam

escalation was justified or that the

historical situation was one that was

acceptable, either from the point of view of

Christian faith or from the point of view of

Christian non-violence.

In 1965 an international team of

religious leaders decided that they would go

to Southeast Asia to see the situation for

themselves. This included people like Martin

Meamolar (Phonetic), a German war hero of

World War I and then one who resisted Hitler

and was thrown in jail during Hitler's

regime. He was a submarine commander and

Lutheran pastor after World War I. Martin

Meamolar was one of these people who was

concerned about what was going on.

So this international team was

formed and the Fellowship of Reconciliation

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

370

decided they would sponsor it, and they

invited Dr. King to be a part of that team.

He could not go, so he called me and asked me

if I would take his place and then have

conversations with him about this and make my

report, because we were to go as pastors and

religious leaders and then we would make a

report to the nation, to especially the

churches.

So I agreed to go, and Centenary

Church here in Memphis gave me extra vacation

time so that I could do it. They thoroughly

supported it. So I went to -- went with this

team instead of Dr. King.

When I returned, I wrote a report

and I sent him a copy of the report, and then

he and I had two or three conversations about

it.

Q. Who was the year of that visit?

A. That was 1965. It was June and July

and then into August of 1965. It was

supposed to be about a month's long, but

because of some of the other things, it took

longer.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

371

For example, when we finished the

tour of Cambodia and Vietnam and Laos and

Thailand, we gathered back in Hong Kong and

then we had an urgent request from the

Council of Churches, the United Methodist

Church, the Anglican Church of Australia,

asking for someone from the team to come and

talk to some of their churches across that

country. And I agreed to be that person.

So this meant I spent an extra seven

days in August every day in a different city

in Australia visiting with churches, usually

a large meeting at night, and then during

their morning and afternoon gatherings of

clergy of all denominations.

Q. Do you remember the evening when he

came formally out against the war in Vietnam?

A. Well, Bill -- Mr. Pepper -- I have

different opinions of this. I do because he

did speak about it in a number of settings.

But the one that caught the attention of the

nation was April the 4th, 1967, where he

agreed to speak at the Riverside Church in

New York with -- under the auspices of clergy

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

372

and laity concerned for the Vietnam War in

Southeast Asia, with people like William M.

Sloancoff and Rabbi Abraham Heschel and a

whole range of some of the best known

Protestant, Jewish, Catholic Jewish people in

the country. That was April 4th, 1967.

Q. That was one year to the day before

he was assassinated. Is that right?

A. Yes, that's correct. One year to a

day.

Q. What was the reaction to that

Riverside Church speech?

A. Well, from the point of view of many

of us, and I read the speech later on, of

course -- in fact, I think it is his most

important and creative speech from the point

of view of spiritual understanding. It is

his most prophetic speech.

The reaction in the press and the

reaction in Washington was intense

hostility. I have since that time read

accounts of some of that hostility, since I

was not in those circles at all, but there

was intense reaction.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

373

Of course, that reaction was

intensified both in the White House and in

the FBI, I think probably also in the

military.

He was called a traitor. There were

other black leaders in the movement who

castigated him. There was great reaction

against him. There were people who did not

have the broad theological and spiritual

vision that he had. So they felt that he was

getting out of his field.

Q. But he wasn't the a civil rights

person in that sense?

A. He was a pastor, he was a prophet, he

was a preacher, he was a teacher. So he

wasn't out of his field.

Q. It was a much broader field?

A. Yes, sure, but they said, no, you are

confined to civil rights. Well, even that

civil rights question has to be expanded

because Martin King spoke always on much more

than civil rights.

After all, in the Bible, the notion

of justice is an important question, an

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

374

important concept. That was one of his big

words. The word "liberty" is a big word in

the Bible. That was one of his big words in

the movement. I often in my own teaching and

preaching and lecturing insist that our

movement was far more than, quote, a civil

rights movement. We were a movement

concerned for helping this nation purge

itself of a nightmareish part of its history.

Q. Did he express concern to you during

that year of time, the last year of his

life -- now we're in 1967 -- did he express

concern to you during that period of time

about the enemies that he was developing, the

forces of opposition that he was building up

against him, that they were growing and they

were perhaps more lethal than before?

A. Yes. We had a fairly large movement

retreat. I think it was in August of 1967.

It was in our -- as I recall, it was at the

Penn Center, which is a camp and retreat

center owned by the American Friends Service

Committee in South Carolina. We had a

several-day-long retreat there in August.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

375

The very first day he said, Jim,

let's take some time off and go off by

ourselves and do some talking. So I said,

whatever you say. So we went off one

afternoon. It is a large camp, and you could

walk through the forest and meadows and what

not.

So we went off for along walk. He

talked at length about the way in which he

was getting the full heat of the FBI, he was

getting the full animosity of President

Johnson.

Up to that time president Johnson

and he were in conversations by phone and he

had been in the White House on a number of

occasions, but all of this was stopped. None

of his phone calls to the President were

being responded to for just normal

conversations about issues in relationship to

the movement.

Q. After April 4th, 1967, that

communication between Dr. King and the

President stopped?

A. Yes, that's right, stopped, yeah,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

376

where formally he had been there, where

formally his phone calls were answered and

responded to by senior staff and by the

president himself, this all ended. He

suddenly became a non-person in the White

House, according to him.

Q. To the best of your personal

recollection, Reverend Lawson, was there an

economic impact upon his organization as

well?

A. Yes, there was. I think that behind

the scenes there was a deliberate effort to

get people not to give financial gifts. A

lot of times a lot of gifts were

spontaneous. SCLC had a direct-mail program,

and Dr. King and others called upon people

individually to give, but oftentimes in the

midst of the struggle there would be a

spontaneous outpouring. That's one of the

ways in which our movement was able to

sustain itself financially, because it didn't

cost.

For example, in the sanitation

strike on one occasion we must have received,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

377

because of Bayind Rustin, who was on the

television show about the sanitation strike,

we must have received, I don't know, dozens

and dozens of mail bags from just around New

England and New York. These bags would

contain note after note, and in almost every

note there was a check that ranged in size

from five dollars to a hundred dollars or two

hundred dollars. These were all for the

sanitation strike.

Of course, it went into the relief

fund, but it took volunteers days to get

through just that one television program

where Bayind Rustin talked about what was

going on. We had to keep the thirteen

hundred workers and their families alive.

They had no money. They were poverty

workers.

Q. During this period can you recall

specific acts of harassment or intimidation

or surveillance which you became aware that

were visited upon Dr. King?

A. Well, he told me the death threats at

home and in the office multiplied. That's

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

378

the one I remember the most. I knew at one

time how many such calls about death were

coming to him, but I don't remember that

figure now.

Q. After the declaration of opposition

formally against the war in Vietnam at

Riverside on April 4 of 1967, this country

was on fire during that year, wasn't it?

A. Yes. 1967.

Q. Numbers of cities burned?

A. Yes. I'm trying to remember all the

places, and I don't, but the huge one was

Detroit, Michigan, as I recall, 1967.

Q. That was August?

A. That was August of 1967. But there

were a number of others as well.

Q. What did he view as underlying that

type of unrest and disruption? What did he

see as the cause of that?

A. Well, he knew that -- he felt that a

lot of it was being promoted not simply in

opposition to him and in opposition to

non-violence, but also it was being promoted

by various provocateurs in the country,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

379

though he did not really name who they might

be, although he suspected that the FBI was

often provoking enmity against him.

Q. When he turned his attention to

economic issues, what was the focus of that

work and what was the analysis that he saw of

the distribution of wealth as it related to

the war in Vietnam?

A. On April the 4th, 1967, one of the

things he said was that the war against

poverty was being struck down in the rice

patties of Southeast Asia. That may be

almost the exact way he put it, as I

remember. But it was in these months, then,

that he was pulling -- tying to pull together

a major effort to call the nation's attention

to the question of poverty.

In 1967 we were talking about how

materialism, militarism, greed, poverty.

Those were in a sense the twin enemies of the

whole movement and that you could not deal

with racism if you did not deal with the

issue of poverty, that you could not deal

with the issue of poverty if you did not deal

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

380

with the issue of militarism.

So these were conversations that

were going on in the movement itself in 1967,

1966 and 1967, because they began much

further than that. I, as one of the teachers

of the movement, made these links clear all

along in various workshops on non-violence

rather persistently. But more and more staff

people were discussing it. I recall

conversations in 1967-- in 1966, rather,

during the Chicago movement, around that vein

of thought.

So it is out of all of that I would

say that goes back to at least 1966 that

began the notion of the Poor People's

Campaign and the notion there was the

possibility of bringing a movement to the

nation's capitol, a non-violent movement,

that would indicate the extent to which the

economic issues, the issues of the violence

of racism and the violence of the society

could be pulled together.

That took greater form, then, in the

fall of 1967, in talking about the Poor

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

381

People's Campaign. That became his

preoccupation. This was really out of his

mind I would say more than anyone else,

because there were lots of folk within SCLC,

within the movement, who said this can't be

done, that you can't have a movement in the

spring and the summer in Washington, D.C.,

that would not become a major catastrophe.

Bayind Rustin and other major folk

in the movement said it was time to take a

moratorium.

Q. Why did they think it would become a

major catastrophe?

A. Because the movement had so much

division within it by this time. You had the

development of the black power group, you had

the development of the Panthers and in places

like Oakland and Kansas City and Chicago and

elsewhere, you had the forces that were

critical of King's denunciation of the

Vietnam War and its escalation.

You always had folk who did not

think direct action was important, that we

should leave it to the lawyers. This was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

382

certainly the point of view of those in the

NAACP Legal Defense Fund who were never sure

that direct action in terms of a sit-in

movement or the voter's rights movement or

the Birmingham movement, they never -- they

never were persuaded that kind of non-violent

action was possible.

So you had these many different

voices that in my judgment were a part of how

a movement, a social movement, evolves, that

it goes through an evolutionary process where

a lot of conversation and discussion and

struggle is necessary. But this was now more

evident in all of 1967 than at any other

time.

I feel now, looking back, that that

was oftentimes provoked by some of the actual

people who were enemies of Martin King and

enemies of the struggle.

Q. Martin King came to believe that the

Poor People's gathering --

A. Campaign.

Q. -- was a critical undertaking from

what you are saying?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

383

A. Yes.

Q. When did he decide in 1967 to go

forward with those plans to bring the masses

of poor people to the nation's capitol?

A. I think it was talked about earlier,

but I think that the confirmation came in

December of 1967 when we had a retreat of the

executive staff and of the board of SCLC. I

think that is where the final arguments and

long conversation and intense conversations

took place, and I think it was from there

that King was convinced that he would move

forward to organize and plan the Poor

People's Campaign.

Q. Was there opposition on the board of

his own organization of SCLC to this project?

A. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. There were --

but, you see, some of that opposition, you

have to recognize, was natural opposition

that was -- that would stretch way back. The

idea of non-violent direct action, though it

is not new to America now, it was a major

secret in America then. There have been

other such struggles, but most Americans are

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

384

unaware of them.

So you had clergy on the board who

had no knowledge of this in a sense what can

now be called a people's struggle for

justice, for liberty, for human rights, for

the Bill of Rights, for freedom of religion,

freedom of speech. You had people who had no

awareness of that.

So you always had a certain amount

of opposition to different campaigns. But

then in 1967 you had members of the board who

thought King should leave Vietnam absolutely

alone and should have nothing to say about

it, that it should not be in the

consideration at all for the struggle. So

they felt very strongly about that and made

their opposition very clear. There was

intense verbal struggle, lots of emotion in

those months in the SCLC circles and board

circles and staff circles.

Q. Wasn't the Poor People's Campaign

even more significant in that it went to the

heart of wealth and power in the United

States? He was talking, was he not, about

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

385

the redistribution of wealth in this country?

A. Well, I want to say about that two

things: One is that you have to recognize

that the sociology of the movement up to this

time was mostly in the southeastern states.

I think it is correct to say that you had had

up to this time in the end of 1967 no major

non-violent movement outside of that

southeastern part of the country.

Then you have to recognize that we

had the Chicago movement in 1966, early

1967. There was intense opposition to SCLC

going to Chicago. Some advisors, some of the

people on the board, some of the members of

the staff, felt we had no business doing this

because they said our strength is in the

southeast. But King recognized that we had

to become a national movement.

There was a ardent group of people,

activists of different kinds, in Chicago that

kept urging Dr. King and SCLC to come there.

So the decision was made to go there.

Another part of this was that King recognized

that each movement had to provide a kind of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

386

confrontation that helped the nation

recognize and see the problem. So in his

mind that confrontation should take place in

the nation's capitol in Washington.

And he, among other things, said

that we will go to Washington and stay until

Congress and the President decide that they

will eradicate poverty in the United States.

I mean, that was one of the statements he

made.

Another kind of statement he made

was that we will pull together the peace

movement and we will shut down the Pentagon

in the summer of 1967. You know, these are

rather phenomenal statements. But these are

some of the things that you can find in his

speeches, in his talks, in his -- as he was

organizing this movement.

So he was going there believing that

it would be possible to basically paralyze

Washington and to paralyze the government

until it faced up to the issue of poverty and

dealt with it.

Q. Don't you believe that that posture

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

387

and those statements could only have

heightened, enormously heightened, the

anxiety of all those in power?

A. I have no doubt. I have no doubt

whatsoever in my own mind, though I do not

know the behind-scenes work of Washington at

all. But I have no doubt that these kinds of

statements raised the anxiety levels in the

White House and elsewhere across Washington.

Q. Do you believe he could have --

A. Remember it is during this period

that J. Edgar Hoover was saying that King was

the number one enemy of the nation. That was

being said.

Q. Jim, do you believe that he could

have brought half a million people into that

setting in Washington with all of the

disparit parts of that movement, all poor,

all stressed and anxious people, that he

could have put that group together without

that gathering turning violent eventually?

A. No, no, I think that with King's

leadership and strength, I think that we

could have had a movement in Washington,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

388

D.C., that would have been a non-violent

movement fundamentally. After his death, in

fact, it was basically a non-violent

movement. But it was without his presence

and without his leadership at that time. The

Resurrection City did not turn violent.

Q. But it was without the masses?

A. It was without the numbers and

without the power and strength that Martin

King represented. We have to recognize that

in such movement as these, persons become

symbolic leaders, and they are larger than

life in many ways. If you study, for

example, the movement in India with Gandi,

this was the case.

Now King had fundamentally replaced

for the world the Gandi figure, because his

name was known everywhere. I travelled in

India and Africa and Latin America in those

days, Southeast Asia, and Martin King was the

best-known American. I travelled in Europe

for the World Council of Churches. I

represented my denomination in all kinds of

work camps, workshops. I did non-violent

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

389

training in Europe in the 1970's. King was

the best-known name.

Q. With over thirty years of reflection,

though, now, looking at the context of events

then and the violence in the cities

throughout America during 1967, do you

believe that those in power could have so

dreaded this event taking place that they

might have resorted to any means to make sure

that he didn't lead it?

A. Well, I have no doubt about that at

this moment. We've learned more since then.

Here in Memphis, rather, I think in

1993 I think this city was startled when on

the front pages of the Commercial Appeal an

article that I got a copy of, and I have it

still in my files at home, where it was shown

in this investigative peace that Martin King

had been trailed and under the surveillance

of military intelligence night and day

throughout his entire life.

Not just Martin King but that his

father and his grandfather had been under

military intelligence, surveillance, since

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

390

1917, seventy-five years, military

intelligence. Now, this country has never

been informed what that military intelligence

was doing, but they started looking at his

father and his father, A. D. King, during

World War I, because they thought that black

people would be on the side of Kaiser

Wilhelm. How anyone could have that notion

is beyond the realm of my understanding.

Then in World War II they said black

folk would go with the Nazi's. That is such

craziness that racism develops in some white

power structure people. So his family was

under surveillance of the military

intelligence for seventy-five years. This is

now documented.

THE COURT: Mr. Pepper, we're

going to stop here and give the jury a coffee

break. We're coming back in about ten

minutes.

(Jury out.)

(Short recess.)

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: All right,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

391

Mr. Pepper. We're ready.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you, Your

Honor.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Reverend Lawson, you

have very patiently taken us from the

beginning of your association with Martin

King and even your own work prior to that up

through his transformation and his maturing

in the 1960's and his declaration of

opposition to the war to his commitment to

the Poor People's Campaign in Washington at a

time when the nation was on fire, anxiety

everywhere.

I'd like us now to move through your

eyes to Memphis, Tennessee, and the

relationship as you see it between the

sanitation workers' strike in this city at

that time in early 1967 and the wider

movement heading toward a massive invasion,

an encampment in Washington, of poor people

from all over the country.

If you would just address the

relationship between the two activities.

Tell us how you see that they related to each

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

392

other.

A. Well, Martin King is the one who said

it, because on his first visit here during

the sanitation strike, March 17th or 18th,

when I picked him up at the airport that

night to take him to the mass meeting, one of

the things he said to me is, Jim, you are

doing in Memphis what I hope to do in the

Poor People's Campaign. Then he went on to

talk about linking the economic question to

the question of the racism, poverty issues

and transforming that.

Now, that's a continuation of

conversations out of staff meetings and board

meetings in the 1966, 1967, at least, but he,

in other words, decided that he could come to

Memphis to speak because he recognized that

these thirteen hundred workers were working

for poverty wages and that that was the heart

of the question of racism in many ways.

Slavery was working for nothing,

substainance, food at best, an economic

system which constantly does not want to pay

ordinary people their due for their good and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

393

essential labor for the society.

So I -- he made that connection for

me in very clear fashion. He saw the Poor

People's Campaign as a way by which we could

bring to the nation's attention to the

necessity of America finally making a

decision that we didn't have to have the kind

of poverty we had because we had more than

enough wealth and we had more than enough

work, and that the work should allow people

to gain the wherewithal to take care of their

own basic necessities.

Q. Before he entered the fray here in

Memphis in support of the sanitation workers'

strike, that dispute became very evident and

indeed disruptive of civic life?

A. You mean the sanitation strike

itself?

Q. The sanitation workers strike.

A. Yes.

Q. Can you give us the background,

because you were in the middle of that at the

time?

A. Well, the sanitation workers, of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

394

course, were all city employees, but they

never received any kind of just remuneration

or opportunity for advancement, and the

segregation in the department was rampant.

Oftentimes these men were humiliated

in their workplace, harassed in their

workplace. T. O. Jones and a handful of

people had for about six years been trying to

organize this group of thirteen hundred

people into an effective union and working

people's organization whereby they could

collectively improve their situation, their

work situation. That had always -- that had

for the most part was a hard uphill struggle

all the time, but it proved to be successful

on February 12th, I think it was in 1968,

when all thirteen hundred workers walked off

the job, fed up with what they had to put up

with for so many years.

One of the things that had provoked

them at that time was the death of two of

their colleagues who during a storm sat in

one of the huge trucks, and the mechanism had

a failure, and they were crushed. Part of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

395

their complaint was the fact that when it

rained or snowed, they either had to work in

the snow or go home without pay. They needed

every hour of work they could obtain.

White supervisors in the department

could go back to the barns and drink coffee

and play cards and would get paid for the

entire day, but these ordinary people on the

trucks lifting the cans and all did not, and

there were no health benefits. Safety was an

issue for them, the hazard of the job

itself.

So when these two men were killed,

that stirred a great deal of anger and

courage. So they almost unanimously walked

off the job together without any plan of any

kind.

In February you don't have a

sanitation strike. You do it in July. They

hadn't talked to the international union or

anybody. I mean, they made the decision

themselves. Their anger in fact motivated

them to have the courage to do it, so they

did it.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

396

Well, that created consternation in

the community, in the city as a whole. Mayor

Henry Loeb immediately said it was illegal

and they had to go back to work. They asked

for negotiations and conversations which he

for the most part declined.

When the strike began, I immediately

supported them and began to raise offerings

in my congregation because I knew they would

need food and would have to be helped. Other

clergy did that rather spontaneously also.

So a sizable group of us supported their

demands for change from the very beginning.

But the mood of the city was that the strike

is illegal and they had no business doing

it. So what happened was that you therefore

had a stalemate and a confrontation.

Q. How did Martin King become involved

in that dispute?

A. Well, a variety of us went to the

meetings with the workers and we had been to

help them in various ways. The international

union did not abandon them in spite of the

fact that there was no foresight in this.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

397

They came in and worked with them and tried

to work with the rest of us as well.

We tried to work very hard to get

the city council and the mayor to make an

agreement and settle the strike. In a series

of meetings with various people of the city

council and in a series of meetings in the

community with some businessmen behind the

scenes working on it as well and a variety of

clergy working on it behind the scenes, we

thought we had an agreement where -- I can't

remember the exact name of the committee, but

Councilman Davis chaired perhaps a labor

committee or something like that. They had a

big hearing in city hall. They agreed that

they would propose an easy settlement of the

strike.

We agreed that we would then come

back the next two or three days or the next

councilmanic meeting for this settlement to

be announced. It was to be at city hall

after a few days. Then we got word that the

meeting would not be at city hall because of

the size, with many of us coming to the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

398

meeting, and it was announced in the civic

auditorium.

When we arrived that morning at the

civic auditorium there were perhaps eleven,

twelve hundred people in all. Some of the

city council people had come onto the

platform. The lights were on, a microphone

was available. They made the announcement

that the council had decided that they would

leave the matter in the hands of Mayor Loeb.

So the agreement the previous days

was faulted by the city council. After this

announcement was made, the lights in the

civic auditorium were all turned off, and

they as much said the meeting is over.

Well, that created a storm in this

crowd, angry cries and all. A few of the

clergy and a couple of the union --

international union leaders, Jerry Worth in

particular, we rushed to the platform and

tried to get people to sit down and be calm

and cool. There was no microphone, so we had

to shout. But we managed to bring some

calm.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

399

We requested the civic auditorium to

turn the lights back on and give us a mic so

we could sit there and have a meeting and try

to manage this. In the process of that

effort, we did manage to get people directed

and get their energy directed, and we decided

that we would walk in mass in the street from

the civic auditorium down I guess it is Main

Street past City Hall and to Mason Temple.

A couple of the leaders, I don't

remember who specifically, quickly got

Commissioner of Fire & Police Holloman on the

phone and got his permission that we could

walk in a non-violent fashion down the

street.

So we announced this and directed

the people go onto Main Street out the front

doors and to gather and then we would proceed

down the street and we said we have the

permission of the city to do it. The

commissioner of the fire and police issues

permits for such a thing, such events in

Memphis.

So we got it started and organized.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

400

Many of the stewards, many of the leaders and

the clergy, in an orderly fashion we started

on what would be Main, south on that street,

I guess. Yes, it would be south on Main

Street. Well, after we had gone about two

blocks away from Poplar, out of nowhere

appeared police cars, a whole line of police

cars.

We were walking on the right side of

the street going south, and these cars came

from the side streets onto Main Street and

rolled up all along side of us so that there

was a long line of police cars perhaps the

length of the walk. We were a peaceful

march. Then I noticed some of the cars

coming over the yellow line and trying to

intimidate some of us walking. I was towards

the front of the March.

As I always do in a demonstration, I

try to keep my eyes on whatever is going on

as far as the whole business to the best of

my ability. So I turned around and went to a

couple of the police cars and said, now,

look, we have Holloman's permission to walk,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

401

you guys are just trying to provoke an

incident, so stay where you are, stay on that

side of the line.

Then a second time they moved over,

and some of the sanitation workers put their

hands on the car, the police car, as though

to push it back, and I saw this from the side

of my eyes, and I rushed back again a few

steps and again told the sanitation workers

to leave it alone and to go ahead and walk.

They said, well, they are

deliberately doing it. I said, I know, they

are trying to make us break up, they are

trying to find an excuse to stop us. Then it

happened again and they moved over on the

marchers. This time the sanitation workers

put their hands on the car, and like that the

police cars all up and down that line

stopped. They were all filled with

officers.

These officers poured out of the

cars with cans of mace and proceeded to mace

everybody they could mace. They had some

targets. They dragged off two or three

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

402

people, I don't remember how many. People

like Jerry Worth were given a full dose of

it. I had glasses on, and so they are macing

me in the face.

I stayed on my feet and kept

blinking my eyes rapidly. I got it into the

eyes and I tried to cry so that my eyes would

keep washing it out. The march was broken up

in that fashion. I realized that they had

planned to do it.

I don't think Holloman had planned

that to happen. I don't believe he did at

all. But the officers in the field decided

we were not going to march down to Mason

Temple.

So most people scattered. A few

people were arrested. But some of us

remained on the scene. So I suggested to

those of us who were around, let's continue,

we will walk on the sidewalk and we'll go on

to Mason Temple.

So as a consequence, we went --

probably fifty, sixty of us we managed to

stay together and we walked on the sidewalks

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

403

and went on to Mason Temple.

By the time we got there, people

were coming from all directions, and lots and

lots of clergy were descending on it. At

that point we had a major community meeting

that said that this was deliberate and we

must organize ourselves to resist in every

way we can and to see to it that this strike

was successful.

At that meeting, then, a strategy

committee was appointed made up of

representative people in the community and

folk from the union. I had to leave because

I had some hospital calls that were urgent,

because this was about six o'clock, seven

o'clock, now at night. So I left the meeting

before it concluded. But I was asked to be a

member of the committee.

After I made my hospital calls and

all and got back home probably nine, ten

o'clock that night, I had a call, a phone

call, as I recall, from Harold Middlebrook,

one of the ministers in the city, who said,

Jim, the committee was formed and you, of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

404

course, know you are on the committee, but

the meeting asked that you become chair of

the strategy committee and call the

meetings. I said, okay.

I started organizing things. We had

a meeting that Monday. This might have been

a Friday. I called an immediately a meeting

that Monday. We called at the meeting the

members of the committee as Harold

Middlebrook gave me their names during the

weekend, and at that meeting we had our first

strategy meeting about how do we mobilize our

community to really now stay behind this,

because this is a serious struggle, what the

police did was unwarranted.

In that meeting we decided let's

begin mass meetings. So we began planning

and called mass meetings that very week, that

is, a mass meeting being a gathering

usually -- not usually, but gathering in a

church. This was a common model that we used

throughout the 1960's in the South.

Then we said we will bring in some

national spokespeople. We mentioned Roy

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

405

Wilkins, Bayind Rustin, a number of names,

Martin King. So we made assignments to

different people that worked with different

names to get them there immediately for mass

meetings.

Of course, because of my ongoing

connection with Dr. King, I was asked to

contact Dr. King. I did almost immediately

and asked him to come to Memphis.

In our first conversation I briefed

him on the march. He knew about it already,

of course, because it was in the news. He

agreed immediately that he would come, but,

of course, he also said, you know my

schedule, I have to negotiate with it. I

understood that readily and easily and told

him, well, you name the date and we'll be

ready for you when you name the date.

So we left off that phone call with

his telling me that you keep in touch with

me, if I'm not available, talk to Ralph

Abernathy. I talked to Ralph, and we left it

with that. He and I pretty much stayed in

touch until he gave me the date of March 17th

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

406

or 18th, I don't remember exactly. I didn't

look it up. That is when he was coming.

So that's how he got involved. And

he was invited as a spokesperson, he was

invited as who he was, as a symbol, and he

was invited also because from my perspective

the sanitation strike was a part of the

movement up to that time.

Q. How did he see this in relation to

the Poor People's Campaign that was to

descend upon Washington later that spring?

A. Well, the executive staff of SCLC was

very much opposed to him changing his

schedule to come, but he insisted that the

sanitation strike was an economic struggle in

part and that he would nevertheless do it.

The way he compromised with them was

that in some of our planning meetings, we'll

just have one of our planning meetings in

Memphis, which means that we can do it there

just as easily as in Atlanta or in Jackson,

Mississippi, so we'll have an executive

committee meeting.

When they arranged that executive

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

407

committee meeting, I suppose that King made

the decision that he decided it would be in

Memphis and brought the executive committee

meeting to meet in Memphis I think on that

Tuesday. It was the Monday that we had the

mass meeting when they came to town. Then I

think they met the next day as the executive

committee planning the Poor People's

Campaign.

Q. So some of the planning took place

here in Memphis?

A. A lot of the planning took place here

in Memphis then because not only did they

have those meetings here, but then also they

decided that Memphis would become the

starting point for the caravan of poor people

that would go -- that would caravan to

Washington. It was decided that Memphis

would become the launching point for the Poor

People's Campaign.

Q. When he arrived on March 17th to

Memphis, do you recall where he stayed, what

hotel he went to?

A. He stayed at the Rivermont. Now, I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

408

want to add to that that this was not the

first time Martin King had been in Memphis.

He had been in Memphis for a number of

different things, for the National Baptist

Convention, for SCLC board meetings. So

Memphis was not a strange place for his

coming here.

I can say something more than that.

In 1966 in June James Meredith started his

march against fear into Mississippi. James

Meredith was the first black man to be

enrolled in the school of -- in the law

school at the university, in Ole Miss. So he

decided to try to help break the fear that

was in Mississippi among many, many black

people registering to vote or any kind of

participation in trying to change their

situation, that he would do this one-man

march. But he was shot just outside of

Memphis in Hernando, Mississippi.

I was in my office in the church I

think it was the Monday that he was shot and

immediately had a call from Martin King who

said, have you heard about Jim Meredith being

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

409

shot? I said, yes. He asked me if I knew

how he was. I said I didn't know but I knew

the hospital he went to.

So he asked me if I would go make a

call on him immediately on his behalf and my

behalf, a pastoral call, and then say to him

that he felt that we should not permit his

shooting to stop his march, his injury to

stop his march, and that some of us would

come on the next day and pick up where he was

shot and continue walking down the highway in

Mississippi.

So I agreed with that and said that

was -- felt that was absolutely right for our

strategy. Then I immediately made

connections with the hospital and with Jim

Meredith's lawyer, attorney, who was a member

of my church and a trustee in my church, A.

W. Willis. So A. W. Willis immediately

called his client and paved the way for me to

go on to the hospital and see him.

So that afternoon I went to the

hospital, had prayer with him and talked and

visited with him and told him about King's

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

410

call and that King would come to see him the

next day. And he agreed to all of that and

so forth.

So the next morning I picked Martin

King up at the airport. As I drove up to the

airport -- we had a Dodge station wagon. By

this time we had three young children. My

wife and our sons were visiting in East

Tennessee with her parents, so I was alone

that week, and so I had the station wagon,

and I drove it up to the airport. As I got

to the departure concourse at the airport,

the departure lane, I noticed two

well-dressed black men on that patio, and as

they saw me pull up, they walked towards the

car and said, Reverend Lawson, you can park

there and just leave it there, we talked to

the police, airport police, and it is okay.

That is the first time that had ever

happened to me. They then came up to the car

and introduced themselves. Then they said,

the Commissioner of Fire & Police Claude

Armour has detailed some of us who are

homicide detectives and robbery detectives

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

411

and we have been instructed that any time

Martin King, Dr. King, comes to this city, we

will see to it that he is secure.

Then he went on to say that if you,

Reverend Lawson, will cooperate with us when

he comes into town, if Dr. King will

cooperate with us, he said, we can assure you

that nothing will ever happen to Dr. King

when Dr. King is in this city.

So from that time on, whenever he

came to Memphis, that group of homocide

detectives and other detectives were relieved

of all other duty. They gave him

twenty-four-hour surveillance. They talked

to his office and him about where you will be

safest, where are the places he could be most

secure.

So he mostly stayed at the Admiral

Benbow I think on Poplar and at the Rivermont

at their suggestion most of the time.

Q. One of those officers has testified

before this court --

A. Okay.

Q. -- about the removal of security in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

412

the local conspiracy side of this case

previously.

Are you aware of other instances

where that team was formed to protect Martin

King when he came to Memphis?

A. Well, don't recall them all, but I'm

well aware that this happened more than once,

because I know specifically Memphis became

the organizing place for this March, then,

through Mississippi, and my congregation, my

church, became the center of it. We set up

headquarters there, which meant, therefore,

that I had to put into operation expanded

phone lines and all of that, office space, so

that we could do it.

It also meant that Dr. King made

frequent calls when he came into Memphis to

join the march, because this was the best

airport site, and, therefore, I do recollect

that any number of times that detail was

assigned to his care.

Q. Are you aware of your own personal

knowledge and recollection whether or not

that detail was formed on his last fatal

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

413

visit to Memphis?

A. No. I happen to know afterwards that

that detail was not organized on his April

3rd visit to -- April 3rd, 1968, visit to

Memphis. They were not assigned.

Q. His second visit, next visit to

Memphis, after March 17th and 18th, was to

lead a march on the 28th --

A. Of March.

Q. -- of March?

A. Yes.

Q. Would you just briefly describe what

you recall about that visit and that march

which took place about a week before he was

assassinated.

A. Yes. When he spoke the Monday night

of the 17th or the 18th, you should remember

that this was the largest such mass meeting

that had occurred in the movement up to that

time in the southeast. Because in the

Southern states we had no public places to

meet. We couldn't meet in a high school

auditorium. We couldn't meet in a high

school stadium.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

414

So when we had mass meetings, these

were exclusively in black churches, and we

did not have sizable church sanctuaries for

huge meetings. In Birmingham in 1963, in

order to try to accommodate the need for mass

meetings, we would have meetings, mass

meetings, the same evening in five, six,

seven churches all around the city. And Dr.

King and Dr. Abernathy would have to go to

all five of those places and speak. They

would end up one or two o'clock in the

morning finishing those mass meetings. This

was in Birmingham. We had no Mason Temple.

I told Dr. King from the beginning

that in Memphis we have sizable church

sanctuaries, but we have the Church of God in

Christ Mason Temple which will seat eight

thousand people and another five thousand

people can stand in the huge aisles easily

and then with a big parking lot.

The night he spoke, we probably had

twenty-five thousand people jam-packed in the

building and in the parking lot. It was a

magnificent experience. But that was the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

415

largest mass meeting in the movement in the

Southeastern states that Martin King had

spoken in. It was an extraordinary

experience, and after he finished speaking,

members of the executive committee of SCLC

went to him and said we should come back and

march with them.

He called me over and said, what

would it be like, Jim, if I decided to come

back for a march? I said, wonderful, as far

as we're concerned. Then he said, well,

let's do it. He went back, then, and I

suggested to him he go back to the podium and

announce this. Of course, it was met with

thunderous approval.

Q. What happened, Jim, on that March on

the 28th?

A. All right. So on that march Dr. King

and the folk who came with him were late in

arriving. As I remember, we were supposed to

start the march at ten. They did not get

there for varied reasons until eleven. And

against my better judgment, I went ahead and

started. I won't go into all that because

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

416

that is another whole story.

We went ahead and started, but as we

proceeded down Hernando Street to Beale

Street, I saw that already there was no

differentiation between those of us in the

street and those on the sidewalks. It was

not very orderly, from my perspective. But

at the urging of others, we went ahead and

did it. So we hit Beale Street and then

turned on Beale Street towards Main Street.

The block just before Main Street, I

heard what I thought to be maybe windows

shattering behind me. I was the marshal for

the march, so I was up in front. But a group

of other marshals, all clergy, were about a

block in front of me. But the crowd was

everywhere. When I heard that, I grabbed

another marshal and asked him to go back and

see what was going on and see if he could

stop whatever it was and urged the marshals

to become stronger in pushing the march into

the street.

Then I asked Assistant Chief of

Police Lux, who had joined me in the street

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

417

for a few moments, for a bullhorn, which he

quickly procured for me. As I turned the

corner at Main Street and looked ahead, I

heard again what I thought to be some windows

shattering behind me, but as I looked ahead

on Main Street, in the next block and the

next block, I was struck by, one, that in the

second block ahead there were people on the

street busting windows, but, more importantly

there was a phalanx of police officers, I do

not know how deep, in battle gear, helmets,

shields, face shields, all across Main

Street.

When I turned that corner, they were

there two blocks ahead. They were doing

nothing to stop whoever it was busting

windows right next to them. I said to

myself, well, they are there in order to

break up the march again. I said, their

target will be Dr. King, Martin King.

So I ran up to our group of

marshals, which was about a block ahead of

me, and said to them, I want you to stop at

an intersection, I think I said, which was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

418

about a half a block away from the phalanx of

police. I said, I'm going to stop the march,

I'm going to ask Dr. King to leave the area,

and I want you to stand and turn to face us.

I'm going to turn the march around. I want

you to be the last group coming back down the

street and we'll go back to the church and

we'll disburse.

So I rushed back, then, to the first

line of the marchers, which Dr. King was in

the center, and I said to him, Martin, the

police are up ahead, they plan to break us up

and you are going to be their target and I

don't want you to be here. He protested.

Ralph Abernathy was on one side of him and

Bishop Smith, a CME bishop, was on the other

side of him, and Henry Starks, an AME

minister, was in the group there, and they

all agreed with my analysis immediately.

So I said, I know that you don't

want to do this, I said, but I want you to

leave, because I don't want them to get to

you. I asked them then to go down McCall. I

asked Henry to take Bishop Smith and Dr. King

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

419

to McCall Street and go back to the Rivermont

Hotel. I used the bullhorn to tell the rest

of the marchers to turn around and go back to

the church where we're going to disburse. I

added that the police are planning to use

their nightsticks and mace and what not on

us, they are going to break us up, so let's

go back.

So in that spirit they turned around

in the street and we proceeded to make our

way back. I moved through the march with the

bullhorn making this same announcement until

I reached Beale Street. Then I went back up

Beale Street again to continue making that

announcement. We had an orderly return to

the church. Some people stayed at the

church, but others went on to their cars and

went home per what we suggested people do.

By this time I could see on Beale

Street and Main Street havoc going on, mayhem

going on, people busting up windows and what

not, and the police very energetic in beating

people up and dragging them through the

streets. That police activity went on all

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

420

afternoon. There are lots and lots of

witnesses to that.

They used it as a pretense. They

beat up Vietnam veterans who were having

breakfast five blocks away. They beat up

Harold Whalum, who was an insurance

businessman well-known in the city. He was

some blocks away. They broke his skull and

so forth. He was not doing anything but

walking to his car.

Q. To your recollection, was that the

first march or non-violent demonstration

which Dr. King participated in which you were

associated with certainly that turned

violent?

A. Well, let me say it another way. We

had demonstrations where other people were

violent toward us. The marches in

Mississippi, the marches in St. Augustine,

Florida, for an example, where we had

deputized posse sometimes on horses throwing

stones, beating up on us and what not. So

the violence came then.

At this time what I want to say is

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

421

very clear, and I'll write this in my memoirs

one day, that it was the police violence that

provoked this. There were probably

provocateurs who did the looting.

We learned later from our pictures

and community photographers that many of the

looters were Beale Street professionals who

told our people that you dried up downtown,

so you stopped us from working, that is,

pickpockets who had no crowds on Main Street,

for an example. I was astonished at this.

We had many pictures, we had many leaders,

many block workers, who went through all

those pictures the next several days,

pictures of looters and what not, trying to

identify them for ourselves so that we could

see what happened, what went on.

Q. Were you aware of the presence of

out-of-state people at that time?

A. At that time I was not aware, but

I'll never forget -- I don't know if I would

recognize him today, but I'll never forget

one young man who I had never seen before, I

tried to appeal to him. He was rabblerousing

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

422

about this isn't the way you can get anything

done. Well, I spotted that immediately. One

of the marshals told me before the march

began. So I went to him.

I went to the corner where he was

rabblerousing and pulled his shirttail and

asked him please to stop, that if he had a

different theory, then he ought to take it

someplace else, but if he was going to be on

the march, he should try to carry out the

leadership of the community and not go his

own way.

Q. Why did Martin King come back to

Memphis after this march, this disruption,

why did he come back to Memphis for the last

time?

A. Well, because we had a principle in

the non-violent movement. It went like

this: We will not injure you, but we will

absorb your injury of us because the cycle of

violence must be broken. And if we respond

to your violence with violence, then all you

do is escalate the violence. We want the

cycle of violence in America and racism

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

423

stopped. So we will take it on ourselves, we

will not dish it out in kind.

The second issue that was important

to us, we said, was that when the enemies

proceed to do violence against us, we must

not let their violence stop our movement.

That had become kind of a cardinal notion in

the movement all across the South.

So as an example, when the freedom

rides in 1961 hit bus burnings and vigorous

assaults, the KKK and even the police in

places like Montgomery, Alabama, all across

the movement, we said, well, the freedom ride

will continue. I myself went to Montgomery

and was in the first bus from Montgomery to

Jackson, Mississippi, where we were

arrested. We said we cannot permit violence

to stop us.

Dr. King said I know that the

non-violent movement can have a non-violent

march in Memphis. So we will do it. He was

quite determined to show himself and us and

the nation that the movement could have a

non-violent movement.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

424

Q. So he returned to Memphis on the 3rd

of April to have that follow-up March, a

successful non-violent March?

A. A non-violent March, right, to better

organize it and everything else.

Q. What can you tell us about that last

visit to Memphis and what took place, your

personal recollection, up to the time of his

assassination?

A. Let's see. Martin King came in I

think the 2nd or the 3rd. I don't recall

precisely. But one of the major issues when

he came into the city was the fact that city

government had taken a -- had gotten a city

court injunction against our marching.

Very much in the movement, in the

leadership of the movement, we had made the

determination that when a city took an

injunction against us, we would initially

take it to federal court and try to get it

overturned. If we could not get it

overturned, we would march anyway.

So when that injunction was taken

out that early part of that week, I called

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

425

him and let him know about it and told him I

was putting together lawyers to go to the

federal court and challenge it and see if we

could get it reversed.

So when he came in, first on our

minds was that injunction that named the

movement in Memphis, Dr. King, Jim Lawson and

others. As I recall, that's the way the

injunction was written. So that meant, among

other things, being on the strategy

committee, that I had to be the witness in

court for Memphis, in the federal court. And

Dr. King named Andrew Young to be his witness

and spokesperson for SCLC.

So we organized lawyers to challenge

the injunction. We had meetings with them

that week. And then when Martin came in, one

of the first meetings we had was with the

lawyers and Dr. King.

Bill, I hope you'll understand --

Mr. Pepper, I hope you'll understand that I

use "Dr. King" and "Martin," but, remember,

we had an eleven-year or so friendship and it

was always "Jim" and "Martin" --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

426

Q. Sure. No, that's fine. Of course.

A. -- on every situation. So that was

the day. So on April the 3rd we had a

meeting at Centenary United Methodist Church

where he spoke to clergy. We had a mass

meeting planned that night at Mason Temple

April the 3rd. In mid-day or mid-afternoon

on that April the 3rd, it began to storm in a

typically Memphis rainstorm. I have

experienced no such storms like that in Los

Angeles. But it began raining maybe three or

four o'clock. This was not off-and-on

raining. It was a steady downpouring the

rest of that day.

Of course, Martin and Ralph

Abernathy were to speak in Mason Temple, but

with that rain, when I went to pick them up,

and I agreed I was going to pick them up, it

was still pouring rain, and Dr. King was

convinced no one would show up at that Mason

Temple with all that rain. Ralph and I could

not dissuade him.

Finally, the three of us agreed that

Ralph and I would go on to the meeting, and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

427

if we felt that Martin had to come to the

meeting, then one of us would get him on the

phone and call him back, that he would stay

in the motel for the time being, but when he

got his call from us, that he would come on

over. So that's the way we left it. We went

to the meeting. Of course, in the downpour,

probably by this time four thousand, five

thousand people, had gathered.

They were, of course, obviously

there to listen to Dr. King, not to me or not

to Abernathy or to anybody else. And so

shortly after we got there and sensed the

meeting, I think Ralph was the one that went

to the phone and called Martin and asked him

to come on. And he came.

Q. And delivered his last speech?

A. And delivered that last speech in

Mason Temple. That was an extraordinary

experience, too. I've never been in a

meeting like that before.

Q. Did you see him at all the next day,

which was the last day of his life?

A. I saw him on my way to the federal

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

428

court. March the 4th was when we were having

the hearing against the injunction. I went

by the motel to visit with him briefly to go

to court. And that was actually the last

time I saw him.

Q. So you didn't see him after that.

What time of day was that?

A. This was about nine o'clock. I think

court was to open at nine or something like

that.

Q. Where were you when he was

assassinated?

A. I was in court until about -- I got

the judge to excuse me around two o'clock

after I testified. I went back to our

movement office in order to check phone calls

and check the strategy of the march and do

any other kind of business that needed to be

done.

Then by about five-thirty probably I

started making my way home, because Dorothy

and I had a solemn sort of covenant that no

matter what was going on in our lives, that

we would gather for supper around six with

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

429

the boys and eat as leisurely as we could.

Then if I had to go back out, I went back

out.

So I moved on to home. Shortly

after I got home, close to six o'clock, there

was a television set on in an alcove off the

dining room, and I heard something about

someone being shot, and I was in the kitchen

greeting Dorothy when I heard that over the

television. I went to the alcove to see if I

could find out what that was, and as I did

so, then they flashed a kyrin on the bottom,

writing on the television set, saying Dr.

King has been shot at the Lorraine Motel,

then another kyrin that said he was being

rushed to St. Joseph Hospital.

I immediately turned and told

Dorothy what that was and had said, look, you

will need to -- I will rush to the radio

stations to make comments to keep the

community moving in the right direction. You

should get ahold of Holloman and tell him

that I'm breaking the curfew, because I'll be

moving from place to place -- and that is

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

430

Frank Holloman, commissioner of fire and

police -- and tell him that he is to be sure

that I had access to move about the city

while this is happening.

THE COURT: Give me five

seconds.

(Brief interruption.)

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Jim, from that day to

this have you been concerned about how Martin

King was assassinated?

A. Yes. Almost immediately there were

things that troubled me about the

assassination. I learned within the next

day, next twenty-four hours, that his normal

security group from the police department had

not been assigned.

I learned that one or two firemen,

and I've not tried to check on these details,

but one or two fire then who were in the fire

station across the street katty-cornered from

the motel, black firemen, were transferred

from that station in ways that at least those

firemen thought was unusual. They contacted

me and Ralph Jackson and one or two others

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

431

about their removal. They were not what they

considered to be normal removals. The fire

station let's say was over here and the motel

here. It had clear vision.

I learned that Ed Redditt, who was

on surveillance from the fire station, was

moved an hour before. I learned that patrol

cars that were in the region when he was

there patrolling on Mulberry and Main and

what not suddenly disappeared, were nowhere

to be found.

I discovered that on April the 4th,

the night of that day, that there was on the

police band the notice of a white Mustang

fleeing the city in the north who got away.

There was never any explanation of how that

call got on the police band. Ostensibly it

was accessible only to the police.

Well, now I know that there were two

white Mustangs. I've met the drivers of both

of them quite some time ago. The one driver

was James Earl Ray. I visited him in

prison. I can't remember the name of the

other driver, but I sat in an airport in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

432

Nashville two or three years ago with the

second driver of the second white Mustang,

and he told me who he was, why he was in

Memphis and whose car this belonged to. We

know now that there were two white Mustangs

in Memphis on the April the 4th evening.

These questions were never answered

to my satisfaction. I pondered them. I

wondered why when Martin King had stayed more

often in the Admiral Benbow and in the

Rivermont, I wondered where this letter came

from or where this report in the newspaper

came from about why is this civil rights

leader not staying in the perfectly good

negro motel, why is he staying at that white

motel. I wondered about that.

I wondered how they had two or three

different names for whoever they were

seeking, how did that go on? What was that

about? Then when they captured James Earl

Ray and they came to the prison, they fixed

up -- they had him in the county jail, and

they fixed up a special cell with

twenty-four-hour surveillance, no privacy,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

433

twenty-four-hour lights. He had no privacy

whatsoever. He complained.

I kick myself now that I did not go

down to the county jail and talk to William

Morris about why this was going on. It

reminded me of something quite specific. It

reminded me of the brainwashing that our GI's

had in the Korean War.

I'm a heavy reader, and I have

followed much of public life for over fifty

years in all kinds of newspapers, magazines

in the nation, news magazines, magazines of

all kinds. I've read Newsweek, for example,

for over fifty years. I started in junior

high school. So I've observed these things.

When I saw this, I was astonished.

I said to myself, what is going on here?

This is the man, why are they torturing him.

That was brainwashing from Korean experience

according to the things I read from our

GI's. If they've got the evidence about him,

why not just simply go to trial.

Then when they had the

plea-bargaining business, I said to myself,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

434

here is this justice system, the most

important American perhaps other than the

President of the United States has been

killed, and they are going to have a

plea-bargaining instead of a full-scale trial

so that a court of law can tell us, can give

us a full transcript of what that murder is

about.

So these things bewildered me and

made me upset. As I said, I fault myself

that I did not take up the cudgels in

especially 1968, the end of 1968, 1969, when

James Earl Ray was petitioning the court for

relief from this treatment that was making

him sick, keeping him from being able to

sleep, therefore keeping him from being able

to deal with what was going on and what he

needed to do for his own defense.

Q. Have you maintained your interest

down to the present day --

A. Oh, yes.

Q. -- in respect of this case and

efforts, your efforts?

A. Yes. I followed the Congressional

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

435

hearings in the late 1970's or whenever that

was. I talked with Congressman Walter

Fountroy, who was the chairperson of the King

investigation, visited him in his office.

I talked with him, I talked to some

of their -- I guess their investigators by

phone. I was called before that

Congressional committee. But when they were

putting my session in executive session, I

declined, because I felt that if you are

going to have hearings on this important

matter, they should be public.

Q. Will you explain to the jury and the

court what "executive session" means?

A. An executive session meant there with

be no public there, no newspaper, just the

committee asking the questions and just the

witness. They wanted to question me under

executive conditions.

I frankly told the committee -- I

went in and told the committee that I

wouldn't testify under those circumstances.

I think this was too important a matter for

them to hold execute sessions.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

436

Q. Did you form any personal opinions

yourself with all of your concerns and your

consideration of this case?

A. Well, especially in the 1970's when I

went and visited James Earl Ray in prison,

which I did do. I had read all along the FBI

scenarios that James Earl Ray was a racist.

Well, when I visited with him the first

couple of visits I could not discern that he

was racist any more than any of the rest of

us are racists.

As a black man, I think in my

relationships with all kinds of people I can

discern and have been able to discern when

people are in trouble from their prejudices

and bigotries. It is not only in their eyes

but it is in their face, it is in their

language. I did not catch any of that from

James Earl Ray.

In comparing notes with people like

Ralph Abernathy and Jessie Jackson and Dick

Gregory, they all said that in their visits

with him, they could not discern that he was

a racist. I think that group of men would be

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

437

a better judge of who is a racist from close

up than anyone else, certainly better than

the FBI.

So that gave me some grief, because

it just seemed to me the motivation they were

putting up was absolutely wrong. Of course,

I continued to have relationships with James

Earl Ray and was at his funeral, I married

him in jail, I visited him within the last

couple of weeks of his death, had about an

hour and a half long visit with him. It was

a pastoral visit. I prayed with him. I read

scripture to him. I was just convinced that

the man was not a racist.

Q. Finally, Jim, this action in civil

court, this civil court proceeding here, is a

conspiracy and a wrongful death action. It

concerns a family who have lost a husband and

a father.

A. Right.

Q. But because of who that husband and

father was, it is not -- it doesn't stop

there in terms of a loss to the nation.

Could you just finally summarize for us what

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

438

you think is the loss to this Republic of

Martin Luther King.

A. Well, from my point of view in the

1960's Dr. King was the Moses of this

generation and for America. He was a prophet

for the nation. He was the centerpiece of a

movement that was emerging. And the work --

the movement had not yet matured in spite of

the controversy within the struggle, which

was natural.

King was the central voice for the

black people of America with no one close to

representing what he represented for us. You

can go back and search the national studies

of that matter. Ninety-eight percent of

black people in America said that King

represents us. No one was close to ten

percent to that.

So in spite of all the

controversies, then and since, he was the

architect of the movement. And the movement

was at a critical place. We knew that we had

to redirect our energies.

In 1967 he and I had several

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

439

conversations about the need for a

moratorium. We had agreed after one of our

conversations in December that after the Poor

People's Campaign we're going to call off all

demonstrations among ourselves and we're

going to take six or eight months to

restructure and reorganize.

He and I had agreed in that meeting

at the staff and the board in December where

we talked at length about this that we would

continue our conversations in 1968 through

the Poor People's Campaign and then

afterwards SCLC was going to take a major

leap forward for the purpose of

reorganizing.

We didn't have a national movement

yet. We had had cosmetic changes that were

important, the Civil Rights Bill of 1964, the

Voters' Rights Bill of 1965, the anti-poverty

program. There were a whole slough of things

that were happening. But the structures of

the injustice and cruelty had not yet been

challenged and had not yet really begun to

change. These still have not changed.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

440

So we were at a critical point. In

my judgment the assassination of Martin King

and the assassinations of the 1960's,

including the assassination of Malcom X,

meant that the movement did not have the

chance to go to the next stage. And young

men like King and Malcom X and some others

represented emerging leadership that would

have been able to help the movement and the

nation do some major reform.

Q. Has that leadership ever been

replaced?

A. No, of course not. The

assassinations of the 1960's changed the

nation forever. We are worse off in many

ways than ever before.

Right now we have nearly forty

million impoverished people in our country.

Two hundred babies die every day in America

before they are one year old because they do

not have the access to the nourishment they

need in order to live. These are white

babies, these are black babies, these are

Latino babies. These are babies from many

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

441

different walks of life, and they are babies

of every state of the union. That is

disgraceful.

Q. And of every color and complexion?

A. Of every color and complexion.

Q. So was he not in fact the leading

spokesman and advocate for the wretched of

the earth?

A. Yes, exactly. Exactly. America has

never been able to deal with the issue of

slavery, never been able to deal with the

issue of the oppression of women, never been

able to deal with the issue of the notion

that even today many huge business people

have mainly that a lot of people ought to

work and not make living wages.

These are three major issues that

this nation has been unable to face. They've

not been able to deal with the violence with

which we maintain this status quo that hurts

and maims many souls.

The movement was aimed at reversing

that. King's motto was, the SCLC motto, it

was not civil rights, it was redeem the soul

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

442

of America. That was our motto.

So you see right away that that is

much larger than getting a hamburger at a

lunch counter.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further.

Thank you, Jim.

THE COURT: Mr. Garrison.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Reverend Lawson, you and I have

talked previously. I have just a few

questions to ask you. You had mentioned

earlier, I believe, that Dr. King had several

threats on his life. Was this within close

proximity of the time of the assassination

that you are aware of?

A. The threats upon his life were

daily. The rumors in Memphis were rampant

about death threats to him. Afterwards I had

calls from people who told me, for example --

I won't name the businessman who had a woman

who was his housekeeper who said that while

she was serving him supper, they were talking

about the imminent assassination of Martin

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

443

Luther King in Memphis. This was just maybe

the week before the assassination.

Q. You weren't there the day of the

assassination -- I mean, you were not at the

location?

A. I was not at the motel at the time.

Q. Have you ever had any investigation

or that you have conducted that would

indicate as to where the shot may have come

from?

A. Oh, yes. I can't name them all, but

there were at least -- there were five or six

people on the grounds at the time that the

FBI and the local police never interrogated.

Jessie Jackson was on the ground floor. He

has never been interrogated.

Jim Orange was one of our field

directors. He claims that he saw a figure

and smoke in the brush outside -- this side

of Main Street. He has never been

interrogated.

There is a New York Times reporter

who was on the same floor of the balcony. He

has written this in his book now, that he has

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

444

never been interrogated. He saw smoke or a

figure in the brush above the motel (sic).

So there were a number of people who

were on the scene who are not to be found in

the Congressional record or in the official

police reports, but they were there.

MR. GARRISON: I believe that's

all I have. Thank you.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further.

THE COURT: All right. You can

stand down, Reverend Lawson. We're going to

lunch. I know you don't want to remain this

the courtroom at this time.

(Jury out.)

(Lunch recess.)

THE COURT: All right. Bring

the jury in, please.

(Jury in.)

(Bench conference outside the

presence of the court reporter.)

THE COURT: All right. You may

call your next witness, Mr. Pepper.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you, Your

Honor.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

445

Plaintiffs call Maynard Stiles.

MAYNARD STILES

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Stiles.

A. Good afternoon, sir.

Q. Thank you very much for coming here

this afternoon.

A. You are welcome.

Q. Would you state your full name and

address for the record, please.

A. My name Maynard Stiles. I reside on

Highway 57 in Fayette County, Tennessee.

Q. And you are presently employed?

A. No. I'm retired.

Q. And how long have you been retired?

A. I retired in January of 1989.

Q. What did you do prior to your

retirement?

A. I served in various capacities of the

City of Memphis, including the director of

fire services, director of public works,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

446

director of sanitation services, purchasing

agent for the city.

Q. You've been a long term public

servant in Memphis and Shelby County?

A. I was there for a few years, yes,

sir.

Q. Were you at one time an official with

the Department of Public works?

A. Well, I was director of public

works. Prior to that I had been

administrative assistant to the director of

public works, and sanitation at one time came

under public works, and I was in the

Sanitation Department at that time.

Q. I see. Did the Sanitation Department

come under public works in 1968?

A. Yes, it did.

Q. And what was your capacity in 1968?

A. You know, I'm not sure I can tell

what you the exact title was. It was either

a division superintendent or a district

superintendent, whichever was higher, within

Sanitation.

Q. So you were a senior official in the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

447

Sanitation Department at that time?

A. I was over approximately one-third of

the city.

Q. What did your duties encompass in

that position?

A. Well, the collection of garbage was

primary, but there were various and sundry

other things, such as street cleaning, the

collection of trash, the operation of

landfills and various administrative duties.

Q. Right. Were there any sort of

cleanup duties connected with your office at

that time? Were you overlooking any of that

activity?

A. Well, we did cleanup on a continuing

basis. After the strike, everything was

combined -- or when the strike began

everything was combined and we worked out of

one operation, and one of my duties at that

time was liaison with the Memphis Police

Department, and it could encompass anything.

Q. Right. So you were a liaison officer

from the Sanitation Department to the Memphis

Police Department at that point in time?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

448

A. At that point in time.

Q. All right. Who was the Memphis

police department officer or inspector who

was your counterpart or with whom you

liaised?

A. I believe that was Sam Evans.

Q. Inspector Sam Evans. Now, on the

morning of April 5th, 1968, the morning after

the assassination of Martin Luther King, did

Sam Evans call you early in the morning?

A. I received a call from Inspector

Evans on or about seven a.m. requesting

assistance in clearing brush and debris from

a vacant lot in the vicinity of the

assassination.

Q. If you would just cast your eyes over

here, Mr. Stiles, for a moment, this drawing

shows Mulberry Street and South Main Street,

and in between the two of course the fire

station, parking area and a rooming house,

and behind this rooming house a grassy or

brushy, woodsy kind of area. Was that --

would that be the area that Inspector Evans

requested that you clean up?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

449

A. That appears to be the area that he

requested we send crews to assist in the

clean-up, yes.

Q. Right. And what did you do in

response to to that request?

A. I called another of the

superintendents in sanitation, Dutch Goodwin,

and he assembled a crew working under a

foreman, Willie Crawford. They went to that

site and under the direction of the police

department, whoever was in charge there,

proceeded with the cleanup in a slow,

methodical, meticulous manner.

Q. And about what time of day would they

have started that clean-up? Do you know?

A. Well, I can't tell you exactly. But

if I didn't get the call until after seven

and I called them immediately afterwards, by

the time they got crews together and got

there, it probably was no earlier than ten

a.m.

Q. Okay. So they started that morning,

as you call it, with a meticulous cleanup of

this entire area that was over grown, heavily

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

450

over grown with brush and bushes?

A. Correct.

Q. Did you yourself go by that scene to

see how it that cleanup was progressing at

any time?

A. I didn't go by to see how it was

progressing. I went by to see if I could

give them any assistance in any other way.

Because it wasn't up to any of us as to how

it was progressing. That was up to the

police department.

Q. Do you know how many men were

actually -- did you notice how many men were

actually involved in the cleanup over there

of the brushy area?

A. I'm afraid my thirty-five year old

memory is not quite that good.

Q. Would it have been more than two?

A. Yes, it would have been more than

two.

Q. Right. Okay. So there is no

question in your mind that that area, that

brushy area, was carefully, meticulously,

cleaned up on April 5th, starting on April

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

451

5th, the morning after the assassination?

A. That's correct.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you,

Mr. Stiles. No further questions.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Mr. Stiles, let me ask you

something. When you were there -- you were

there the day it was being cleaned up. Am I

correct, sir?

A. That's correct.

Q. Did you see anyone in that area other

than the Memphis public works personnel that

you noticed?

A. Well, representatives of the police

department.

Q. But most all city employees that you

see in that area that you recall?

A. If I'm not mistaken, I saw someone

taking pictures. Now, whether that

individual was a representative of the police

department or a civilian photographer, I

can't say.

MR. GARRISON: That's all.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

452

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Mr. Stiles, has any researcher or

book writer, particularly in recent times who

has written about this case, attempted to

interview you and take your story with

respect to this cleanup?

A. No.

Q. No one has?

A. No book writer. I've had contacts

from the Justice Department.

Q. Yes, of course. But no book writer

has tried to take your story and research it?

A. No.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further,

Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right,

Mr. Stiles. You may stand down. You can

remain in the courtroom or you are free to

leave.

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: Your next witness.

MR. PEPPER: Plaintiff's call

Olivia Catling to the stand, Your Honor.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

453

OLIVIA CATLING

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Ms. Catling. Thank

you very much for joining us this afternoon

and coming down.

Could you state your full name and

address for the record, please.

A. Olivia J. Catling, 375 Mulberry.

THE COURT: Spell your last

name, ma'am.

THE WITNESS: C A T L I N G.

THE COURT: Catling. Thank

you.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Ms. Catling, I

believe you have carried some burdensome

information with you for over thirty-one

years. Is that right?

A. I do.

Q. You've come here this afternoon to

share it with us. Is that right?

A. I will.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

454

Q. And have you ever told this

information to anyone else?

A. No, I haven't.

Q. Either inside or outside a court of

law?

A. Outside -- outside the court there

have been times I have.

Q. You have?

A. With the kids or whatever, husband,

whatever.

Q. Members of your family?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. Ms. Catling, could you tell us where

your house is on Mulberry Street?

A. My house is between Huling and Talbot

just off of Main.

Q. Just off Main?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. Where were you living in 1968, on

April 4th, 1968?

A. At 375 Mulberry.

Q. All right. Now --

MR. PEPPER: May I approach,

Your Honor?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

455

THE COURT: Yes.

(Mr. Pepper approaches diagram on

easel.)

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Now, where is 375

Mulberry from here? This graph is cut off

right at Huling.

A. That's Huling.

Q. The other side of Huling?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. On which side of Huling?

A. Where I was standing or what?

Q. Which side of Mulberry was your

house?

A. That side.

Q. That side?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. The west side?

A. That's right.

Q. And where were you on the 4th of

April, 1968, at around six o'clock in the

afternoon?

A. It was just before six o'clock.

Q. Just before six o'clock. Where were

you at that time?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

456

A. I was at home.

Q. You were at home. What did you hear

around that time?

A. The shot.

Q. You heard a shot?

A. I sure did.

Q. You heard it clearly?

A. Clearly.

Q. What did you do after you heard that

shot?

A. I broke and ran out of the house. I

ran to the corner of Huling and Mulberry.

Q. But did you do something at home

before you ran out?

A. I was cooking some chicken.

Q. That's all right. What did you do?

A. I turned it off.

Q. So you turned off the stove?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. Did you have any children about?

A. The kids was out front.

Q. They were out in front of the house?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. All right. What did you do with

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

457

respect to the children?

A. We all ran down there.

Q. You all ran down there?

A. We ran. We didn't walk.

Q. You ran?

A. Because I said, oh my God, Dr. King

is at that hotel.

Q. Right.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor --

Mr. Garrison, would you like to come around

and see the front of this?

MR. GARRISON: That's okay.

I've already seen it. I'll come around, if

necessary.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) So you ran down to

the corner of Huling --

A. Uh-huh.

Q. -- and Mulberry, which is right here?

A. Right.

Q. Did you cross the street or did you

stay on the north corner?

A. I stood there on the corner.

Q. You stood there on that corner. Why

did you stay on that corner? Why did you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

458

stop there? Why didn't you cross the street?

A. Well, one reason why we didn't cross

the streets is because there were some squad

cars coming.

Q. There were squad cars coming?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. Had they arrived at this area by

then?

A. No.

Q. Where were they coming from?

A. Main.

Q. So they were coming down Huling --

A. Down Huling.

Q. East on Huling from South Main Street

toward Mulberry?

A. Right.

Q. And you just stopped there?

A. Right.

Q. What did those squad cars do and

where did they go?

A. They stopped across Mulberry. It was

like putting a block in there.

Q. They parked across Mulberry?

A. Uh-huh.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

459

Q. They barricaded the street at that

point?

A. That's right.

Q. Now, as you stood on that street

corner, did you notice anything strange or

different happening in the area?

A. There was a car there.

Q. There was a car?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. Where was that car parked?

A. On Huling.

Q. On Huling. Where on Huling?

A. Just about -- I would say it was on

Huling parked to the right on Huling, about

along in there.

Q. Right-hand side of Huling?

A. There is not quite an alley in there,

but there is more like a driveway in there.

It was parked just below there.

Q. Just below that alley, the driveway?

A. Right.

Q. Right there at the right-hand side of

the street?

A. Right.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

460

Q. What kind of car was that?

A. It was a 1965 Chevy.

Q. A 1965 Chevy?

A. Chevrolet, yes.

Q. What color was it?

A. It was green.

Q. It was green. You remember that to

this day?

A. I can't forget it.

Q. Okay. So you saw that car parked

there?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. As you stood on the corner?

A. Right.

Q. Then did you observe something a

short while later while you were still

standing on that corner?

A. Yes. There was a man.

Q. You saw a man?

A. Yes.

Q. And where did you see this man?

A. It is almost like that little alley

there.

Q. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

461

A. I call it a driveway, right in there.

Q. Right here?

A. That's where he came out of there.

Q. He came out of this alley?

A. That's true.

Q. And what was he doing?

A. He ran around the back of the car.

Q. He ran around the back of the car?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. He got in the car?

A. Yes. You want to know how he was

dressed?

Q. Yes. Why don't you tell us how he

was dressed.

A. He had on a checkered shirt, khaki

pants, he had on a light hat, light-colored

hat.

When he did that, he got in the car,

he made a left turn on Mulberry, went back

down Mulberry, he went to Vance, he made a

right turn on Vance going east.

Q. You saw him run through this alley,

get in this car --

A. True.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

462

Q. -- drive and make a left on

Mulberry --

A. True.

Q. -- go to Vance, which is the next

street?

A. Right.

Q. And take a right?

A. Took a right.

Q. Was he driving quickly?

A. There is another street in there

called Talbot. But he crossed Talbot. He

went to Vance. He went east on Vance.

Q. Was he in a hurry?

A. Oh, yes.

Q. How fast was he driving? Very, very

quickly?

A. You really want to I know what I

said? I said, it is going to take us six

months to pay for this rubber he is burning

up. That's how he was going.

Q. That's how he was going?

A. That's right.

Q. My goodness. Now, this alleyway goes

through to the buildings that front on South

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

463

Main and back on Mulberry?

A. No, that alley shuts off at that

building. He had to come down that wall

because that alley, it shuts off that

building. It has got a wall against it.

Q. So the alley dead-ends just before

that?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. He came from somewhere, you don't

know where, of course, but from somewhere --

A. When I saw him, he was coming out of

a hole. It is not really an alley. It is a

driveway, because they park cars in there

now.

Q. Right. So it a driveway?

A. Uh-huh. But at that time it wasn't a

driveway.

Q. Right. Was this occurrence that you

saw this, this man running through the alley,

getting in the car and speeding away, was he

carrying out this act in front of the police?

A. Oh, yes, he was. The police had made

it there.

Q. So the police were there?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

464

A. Yes.

Q. And they saw him do this?

A. Yes.

Q. What did they do?

A. Nothing.

Q. Did that seem strange to you at that

time?

A. It did.

Q. They just let him drive away. Was

this quite close to the time of the actual

killing?

A. This was -- yes.

Q. Within minutes, in any event?

A. Within minutes.

Q. Now, moving on, Mrs. Catling, did you

also see as you stood on that corner a

fireman standing somewhere near the wall and

the bushes --

A. I did.

Q. -- the brushy area?

A. I did.

Q. How was this fireman dressed?

A. In his regular firemen clothes, like

maybe white shirt, standing out. There was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

465

more than him there, but the rest of them was

down there at Mulberry and the next street

down.

Q. Butler?

A. Just behind the Fire Department.

This one particular fireman, he was standing

alone by himself.

Q. He was standing alone by himself.

What was he doing?

A. Well, I imagine he was trying to get

a glimpse of Dr. King, but it happened before

he did. Then do you want me to tell you what

he told the police?

Q. Yes, Ms. Catling, that would be

helpful.

A. He told the police -- he said, "That

shot came from those clump of bushes."

Q. Could you hear him distinctly say

that?

A. Yes. I was standing there on that

corner, and I've got good hearing.

Q. You heard him say to the police in

the area, "That shot came" --

A. From that clump of bushes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

466

Q. -- "from that clump of bushes"?

A. And he pointed to them.

Q. I see. What did the police do when

they heard him say that?

A. Stepped across the street with their

guns drawn.

Q. Did they listen to him?

A. No, I would say they did not listen

to him. The only thing they did is they

walked across the street with their guns

drawn towards that clump of bushes.

Q. You heard him distinctly say that to

the police at that time?

A. I did.

Q. How long did you stand on that

corner, Mrs. Catling?

A. Until the ambulance came.

Q. And took Dr. King away?

A. Uh-huh. And also Mrs. Bailey,

because both of them died at the same time.

Q. Mrs. Bailey, because she collapsed as

well?

A. Yes.

MR. PEPPER: Ms. Catling, thank

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

467

you very much. No further questions.

THE COURT: Mr. Garrison.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Ms. Catling, if I might ask you a few

questions. I still didn't understand the

spelling of your last name.

C A T --

A. L I N G.

Q. -- L I N G?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. That's what I thought it was. I just

want to be sure. On the day this occurred

and you were cooking some food, did you hear

the shot before you went outside?

A. No. I heard the shot in my kitchen.

Q. You were in the kitchen?

A. I sure did.

Q. Okay. Is that like a block away or

half a block away?

A. It is not a block away, it is not

even a half a block away.

Q. Pretty close?

A. You can run down there in two

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

468

minutes.

Q. Were you able to tell which direction

the shot sounded like it came from?

A. From the sound, the way the sound

came from, like the sound was on the side of

the street that I live on.

Q. Okay. So which side do you live on

again?

A. When you are going south, my house is

sitting to the left.

Q. So would you be on the southeast

corner? Would that be a fair statement?

A. No. I'm not on the corner.

Q. Okay.

A. There is a building there. I'm just

down the street below that building.

Q. I see. This Chevrolet car that you

saw -- you said it was a Chevrolet, I

believe, didn't you?

A. Correct.

Q. What color was it?

A. It was green.

Q. A green car. Was it a large

standard-sized car or smaller car? How would

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

469

you describe it?

A. You wouldn't consider it -- may I say

something?

Q. Yes, ma'am.

A. You wouldn't consider cars at that

time small cars because, see, my husband had

a Chevrolet, that's the reason why.

Q. That's why you remember it?

A. Yes. No small car.

Q. But was it a standard-size car or

smaller?

A. Yes, it would be a standard size.

Q. Was it two-door or four-door, do you

remember?

A. It was two-door.

Q. When this person came up to it, did

he have to unlock it to get into it?

A. Yes, he did.

Q. Did he have anything in his hands,

Ms. Catling?

A. No.

Q. He didn't --

A. He didn't have anything in his hands.

Q. Nothing was in his hands?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

470

A. Nothing was in his hands except his

car keys.

Q. He had to unlock it?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. Then he got in it and started it?

A. And took off.

Q. Which direction was it facing?

A. It was facing -- this is Huling. It

was facing Mulberry. That's the reason why

you could make such an easy left turn and go

down Mulberry.

Q. He burned a lot of rubber, in your

words, the way you described him getting

away?

A. He certainly did. As a taxpayer,

yes.

Q. He turned off of Mulberry onto what

street?

A. Onto Vance.

Q. That's the last you saw of him?

A. That's the last I saw of him.

Q. How many police officers were out

there that you saw? You stated there were

some officers that seen him. How many were

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

471

there around there?

A. There was around four squad cars.

Q. Four different cars?

A. Squad cars. I call them squad cars.

Q. How far away from his car were they

parked?

A. They came and parked on Mulberry, to

block Mulberry off. They did not block

Huling off. They blocked Mulberry off.

Q. Okay. When he left, he had gone down

Mulberry?

A. Yes.

Q. But did he go past the police cars?

A. No. He didn't have to pass them. He

passed the police cars, but the police cars

were sitting at the end of Mulberry and

Huling.

Q. Let me ask you this again: How far

was the police car from his car? The nearest

police car was how far from his car?

A. From where he was parked?

Q. Yes, ma'am. Where he got his car,

how far was the nearest police car to his

car?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

472

A. Huling is on the corner. He was

parked just down Huling. That made the squad

car parked on Mulberry.

Q. Would that have been two or three car

lengths or more than that or less than?

A. It could have been the length of

where he parked his car, it could have been

three car lengths, it could have been two car

lengths.

Q. Each police car had several officers

in it? Each police car had several officers

in it?

A. I wouldn't say seven officers,

because they don't ride seven deep.

THE COURT: He didn't say

"seven." He said "several."

THE WITNESS: Well, anyway, that

could mean two, Your Honor.

Q. (BY MR. GARRISON) There were many

police officers out there?

A. Beg your pardon?

Q. There were many police officers out

there?

A. There was many of them.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

473

Q. They were in uniform?

A. Yes, they were.

Q. What were they doing, Ms. Catling?

A. Standing.

Q. Just standing looking?

A. Yes.

Q. Did they have guns in their hands?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you point out to those officers

that this gentleman had run out of an alley

and got in a car soon after the shot and was

getting away?

A. Could I really have my say?

Q. Yes, ma'am. You sure do.

A. As many neighbors as there was in

that neighborhood, they never came to us and

asked us one question.

Q. But you didn't volunteer this to the

police?

A. I didn't volunteer. They didn't

ask. They should have came and said, what

did you see, did you see anything, tell us

what you see.

Q. How close to the scene of the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

474

assassination did you get that day, would you

say?

A. I was, like I said, on the corner of

Huling and Mulberry.

Q. You said that was less than a half a

block away?

A. Oh, sure. You know it is way less

than that. From there to 400, it is just a

hop skip and jump.

Q. When the fireman told that the shot

came from the brush area, you heard him

saying something like that?

A. Right.

Q. Did you look up there --

A. No.

Q. -- in the brush area?

A. No.

Q. You did not?

A. The police was not going to let us

cross there.

Q. But you didn't look up there when he

said that?

A. No.

Q. So you didn't see anyone in the brush

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

475

area because you didn't look up there. Is

that correct?

A. Uh-huh, because, after all, a portion

of that building still covers that section.

Q. You had been living there a long

time, Ms. Catling. Those trees and brushes,

had they been there a long time?

A. They always grew there. They always

grew there.

Q. They hadn't been cut in a long time?

A. Yes.

Q. This fireman that you said made the

statement about where the shot came from,

where was he located when he made that

statement?

A. Just across from the hotel. He was

down on the --

Q. He was on west side of Mulberry?

A. Yes. We all was on the same side of

the street, on the same side of Mulberry.

Q. And the fireman was in uniform?

A. Yes, he was.

Q. What was his race? Was he white or

black?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

476

A. Yes, he was white.

Q. This gentleman that got in the

Chevrolet car, what was his race?

A. He was white.

Q. And were you able to describe about

what age person he might have been?

A. He could have been in his late

thirties.

Q. What was his build? Heavy, medium,

light?

A. May I try to give you his height?

Q. Yes, sure.

A. He weighed about a hundred and

eighty-five to ninety pounds, he was a

five-feet-ten man. My husbands is six feet.

So I could measure him as a little bit

shorter than my husband.

Q. A little bit shorter than your

husband?

A. Right.

Q. Ms. Catling, at the time you had

lived there, had you ever seen anyone up

walking in that brush area up there ever?

A. Never have.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

477

Q. You never have seen anyone?

A. No, no.

MR. GARRISON: That's all the

questions I have.

MR. PEPPER: Just a bit more,

Your Honor.

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Ms. Catling, the man whom you saw

running from the alley onto Huling minutes

after the killing got into the car and drove

away with the Memphis Police Department

officers watching him drive away, had you

ever seen that man before in that

neighborhood?

A. I never had seen him before.

Q. Have you ever seen him since?

A. No, I haven't. I haven't seen him

since.

Q. Ms. Catling, the fireman who you saw

at the foot of the wall yelling to the police

that the shot came from the clump of bushes

minutes after the shooting --

A. Uh-huh.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

478

Q. -- had you ever seen that fireman

before down around Mulberry Street?

A. No, no, not where the Fire Department

is from there where I live, never have, no.

Q. Have you ever seen him since then?

A. No, I haven't.

Q. How many of your children were with

you on the corner when you saw this?

A. Two.

Q. How old were they at the time?

A. Eleven and thirteen.

Q. And they saw the same thing that you

did?

A. Saw the same thing.

Q. Were there any other neighbors

standing there who saw the same thing?

A. Well, some of my neighbors, you know,

were way up in age. It took them time to get

down there, but it didn't take me no time to

get down there, me and the kids, because I

could run and they couldn't. So they walked

down there. I ran down there.

Q. Did the police or any homicide

investigators go door to door, so far as you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

479

are aware, in your neighborhood, knock on the

doors and ask people in that neighborhood,

all of you, any of you, if you had seen

anything?

A. No.

MR. PEPPER: No further

questions. Thank you, Your Honor.

THE COURT: Anything further,

Mr. Garrison?

MR. GARRISON: Let me ask you

one more question, please, ma'am.

RECROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. You saw this gentleman come running

out of an alley there, what, three or four,

five minutes after the shot was fired. Am I

correct?

A. Well, like I said, it took me about

two minutes to get to the corner I would

estimate by me running.

Q. But you really don't know that this

gentleman had anything to do with the

assassination, do you?

A. I cannot say.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

480

MR. GARRISON: That's all the

questions I have.

THE COURT: All right.

Ms. Catling, you may stand down. Thank you

very much. You can remain in the courtroom

or you are free to leave.

THE COURT: Thank you.

(Witness excused.)

MR. PEPPER: Could we approach,

Your Honor?

THE COURT: Yes.

(Bench conference out of the

presence of the court reporter.)

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor, if it

please the Court, the plaintiffs would like

to read into the record the statement of

Hasel D. Huckaby, then in 1993 of 5396

Lockenvar Victory, Memphis, Tennessee.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

481

THE COURT: Would you please

spell the name for me.

MR. PEPPER: Yes. It is

H U C K A B Y. Mr. Huckaby is deceased, Your

Honor.

THE COURT: What's the first

name?

MR. PEPPER: Hasel, H A S E L,

Hassle D, as in David.

THE COURT: Thank you. I needed

that, but the jurors didn't.

MR. PEPPER: Question:

Mr. Huckaby, could you tell us whether you

are presently employed?

Retired.

From which company have you

retired?

Answer: South Central Bell.

Question: How long did you work for

South Central Bell?

Answer: Thirty-six years, one day.

Were you working for Southern Bell

on the 4th of April, 1968?

Answer: Yes, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

482

Question: Would you tell the Court

what your assignment was on that day?

Answer: I was working at the

warehouse across the street from the Fred B.

Gattis store and his warehouse on South

Main.

On South Main Street?

Answer: South Main Street.

Question: Tell us again where on

South Main Street you were, or were you on

South Main Street itself?

Answer: At that point the witness

left the stand and pointed to a building on

the corner of South Main and Talbot.

Question: Did you have an

opportunity while of the you were still here

to spend any time on Huling, Huling Street

area, on that day?

Answer: No, not to my

recollection.

The witness at that point was asked

to take his seat.

Question: So your assignment was to

perform some telephone installation work in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

483

the South Main Street area?

Answer: Right.

Question: And the customer, could

you just name the customer again?

Answer: The Fred B. Gattis store.

He had a store on the west side of Main and

his warehouse was on the east side of Main

across the street from the store.

Question: Moving on, page 1799 in

the transcript, did you observe any

individuals or any automobiles or anyone that

appeared to you to be somewhat unusual in

that area on that day, April 4, 1968?

Answer: I did.

Question: You do remember. And do

you know the significance of the 4th of

April, 1968?

Answer: That day a man being down

there.

Question: But what happened on

April 4, 1968? Not to you, but generally

speaking, what event took place?

Answer: That I know of, this man

was sitting there on the steps and he

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

484

appeared to be intoxicated.

Question: The man appeared to be

intoxicated, but you didn't believe him?

Answer: No.

Question: Why didn't you believe

him?

Answer: Because I had seen too many

of those people on that end of town in

previous work. I had worked down there, and

he didn't appear to be one of them.

Question: What was different about

this man?

Answer: He was too sharply

dressed. He was dressed sharp, fresh shaven

and clean-cut.

Question: Was he on foot?

Answer: He appeared to be.

Question: Did you see him enter an

automobile at any time or go over to an

automobile at any time?

Answer: No, sir.

Question: Did you see an automobile

parked in the area?

Answer: I don't remember one, but I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

485

don't remember seeing one.

Question: Did you speak with this

individual who seemed to be out of place at

all?

Answer: I did. I don't remember

the complete conversation. He said something

like I've got to go home. I don't remember

what it was.

Question: Was this individual and

this event, this observation of yours, ever

brought to your attention again?

Answer: Yes, it was, some six or

eight years later, I met the police officer

that took my statement at the police records,

and we were talking, and he talked about the

case, and he told me that he remembered.

Question: Do you know the name of

the police officer?

Answer: Hamby, Lieutenant Hamby.

Question: Mr. Huckaby, did anything

else happen to you in the ensuing months?

Answer: Some four or five -- three,

four or five months, I don't remember the

exact time, I received a package in the mail

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

486

about six inches square, and I opened it up,

and it was half a pack of cigarettes, a half

box of penny matches and a rattlesnake

rattle.

Question: That's strange. Would

you describe the contents of that package

again, please.

Answer: Half a package of

cigarettes, a half a box of penny matches,

the little box of matches like we used to

buy, and a rattlesnake rattle. The

rattlesnake rattle had, as I remember,

approximately six or seven or eight

rattlers.

Question: What did that mean to

you?

Answer: That meant that rattlesnake

was a good-sized rattlesnake and I had been

told that the rattlesnake rattle gets one

rattle for every year.

Question: Why do you think you

received this strange package?

Answer: At the time I don't know.

I'm still not sure.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

487

Question: Were you uneasy about it?

Answer: I was enough that I went to

the post office, I went to the police

department, and nobody could tell me what it

meant or anything else. They told me to go

on and forget about it. But I tried to find

out about it in the meantime.

MR. PEPPER: That's the end of

the portion of the statement that we want to

read into the record.

The next witness, the plaintiffs

call Mr. Ed Atkinson.

EDWARD A. ATKINSON

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Atkinson.

A. Good afternoon.

Q. Would you state your name and address

for the record, please.

A. Edward A. Atkinson, 1752 Vinton

Avenue, Memphis.

Q. Mr. Atkinson, what do you presently

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

488

do?

A. I'm retired.

Q. How long have you been retired?

A. Since 1975.

Q. What did you do before you retired?

A. I was -- well, immediately before, I

was in the larceny squad at police

headquarters.

Q. All right. You were a serving police

officer?

A. Yes.

Q. And how long had you been with the

Memphis Police Department?

A. About twenty-seven months when I

retired.

Q. Twenty-seven months?

A. Twenty-seven -- pardon me. No, it

was 1950 to 1975. Twenty-five years, three

months.

Q. Twenty-five years plus. What were

your various positions with the Memphis

Police Department?

A. For about the first four, five years

I rode squad cars. Then I went from there to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

489

the traffic division where I worked until I

moved to the personnel division, background

investigations, and then larceny squad.

Q. What position did you have with the

police department in 1968?

A. I was in the traffic division at the

time.

Q. Where were you assigned?

A. My duty at that time regularly was

with the paint crew, escorting the paint

truck as they striped the lines. When I was

not working with them, I worked on the cars

and in the evenings I would drive the

three-wheel motorcycle and turn off the lane

lights on Union Avenue.

Q. Where was your base?

A. Sir?

Q. Where was your base?

A. Headquarters.

Q. Central headquarters?

A. Central headquarters.

Q. Here in Memphis. Do you recall being

in central headquarters one day in 1968, in

the spring of 1968, and just being present at

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

490

a stand-up conversation involving -- where

three of you were standing around?

A. I can't be exactly sure of the

number, but, yes, three, maybe four, on just

passing conversations, yes.

Q. This particular conversation, was a

Lieutenant Earl Clark present?

A. I don't recall specifically who was

there. I really don't he very well may have

been one of them.

Q. And how many other officers were

present? Do you recall?

A. Two, three, besides -- a total of

maybe four, including myself.

Q. Was there at that time a discussion

about the crime scene -- do you recall a

discussion about the crime scene of the

assassination of Martin Luther King?

A. I recall having that discussion with

someone, specifically at that time with those

I'm not sure, but, yes, I had heard that

discussed several times.

Q. Yes. But you have been unable to

recall the name of the one officer who was a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

491

sergeant who was talking. Is that right?

A. No, I really can't remember. I don't

remember specifically.

Q. But that sergeant was speaking to

whom? Even if you can't recall his name, who

was he speaking to?

A. I suppose to all of us generally. I

don't know that he was speaking to anyone in

particular.

Q. Who was there, Mr. Atkinson, in that

little group that you had conversation with?

A. I really can't be sure whether

Captain Clark was one of them. Specifically

I couldn't begin to name who they were.

That's thirty-one years ago.

Q. Of course it was. But at previous

times and under oath you have indicated that

Earl Clark was present at that conversation.

Isn't that right?

A. Not necessarily at that time. He was

present on one occasion when we were

discussing it. Whether it was that

particular time, I don't know.

Q. Was there a discussion on this

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

492

particular time about the line of fire that

was being discussed from the bathroom window?

A. I had heard that discussion or I

heard that remark from possibly two or three

different people. I honestly couldn't say

that at that particular time that Clark was

present.

Q. What discussion did you hear?

A. The comment was made, as I recall,

that they found a hand print in one of the

rooms but they didn't think the shot was

fired from there, and the comment was made

about a sycamore tree that was there or

wasn't there, I don't know.

Q. What was the comment about the

sycamore tree?

A. Well, they said there was a

sycamore -- or at least someone said there

was a sycamore tree there and the shot

couldn't have been fired from that room, it

had to have been fired from another room.

Q. There was a sycamore tree there, so

the shot couldn't have been fired from that

room?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

493

A. That is right.

Q. What room was that?

A. Specifically what room --

Q. Was it the bathroom?

A. I don't recall. They never mentioned

what room it was.

Q. Do you recall the sergeant saying

that he had viewed this site in the presence

of a FBI agent?

A. No. I don't ever recall hearing that

from anyone.

Q. You don't recall that?

A. No.

Q. You only recall the discussion

talking about a sycamore tree and the

difficulty of a shot being fired from a room

because of that tree?

A. That remark had been made on several

occasions at several different times. Most

of the people, in my opinion was that most of

the people that made the remark didn't know

anymore than I would because they weren't

there and neither was I.

Q. Sir, was there ever any suggestion

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

494

made about what should have been done or was

done about that sycamore tree?

A. Someone said it was cut down. I

later heard that, yes, it was cut down, it

had been cut down quite some time before. So

that I don't know. I had never been to -- I

never even been in that area.

Q. You have never been to the site?

A. So I really couldn't say.

Q. But you remember hearing one say it

had been cut down?

A. Yes. Then someone made the remark,

yes, that it was, it had been cut down a long

time ago. Whether there was a tree or not, I

don't know.

Q. Did you have more than one discussion

of this sort just around central

headquarters?

A. I can't say that -- I can't name

anyone in particular. I have no idea.

Captain Clark may have. Or any number of

people I worked with.

Q. Do you recall identifying Captain

Clark explicitly as being present at that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

495

discussion a number of years ago, some six

years ago, under oath?

A. I recall Captain Clark being -- he

was present on a discussion. Whether that

was in the squad room, larceny squad or

where, I don't know. But, yes, the remark

this been made. Whether Captain Clark made

it or someone else present, I don't know.

MR. PEPPER: No further

questions. Your witness.

MR. GARRISON: I have no

questions. Thank you, sir.

THE COURT: All right,

Mr. Atkinson, thank you very much. You may

stand down. You are free to leave or you can

remain in the courtroom.

THE WITNESS: Thank you, sir.

(Witness excused).

THE COURT: Let's take a short

recess, about ten minutes.

(Short recess. )

THE COURT: Bring in the jury.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: Call your next

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

496

witness, please.

MR. PEPPER: Plaintiffs call

Mr. James Lesar.

JAMES H. LESAR

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Lesar.

A. Good afternoon.

Q. Thank you for being here with us,

joining us from the nation's capital. Would

you please state your name and address for

the record.

A. Yes. James H. Lesar, L E S, as in

Sam, A R. My address is 7313 Lynnhurst

Street, L Y N N H U R S T, Chevy Chase,

Maryland, 20815.

Q. Thank you. Can you tell us what is

your profession?

A. I'm a lawyer.

Q. Where do you practice?

A. In Washington, D.C.

Q. What is the present nature of your

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

497

practice?

A. I specialize in Freedom of

Information Act litigation. That means I sue

the United States government agencies for

documents that they don't want to release.

Q. Was there a time in your career when

you represented James Earl Ray?

A. Yes. From approximately June or July

of 1970 until 1976 I represented James Earl

Ray.

Q. In the course of that representation

were you associate counsel at proceedings

that were held in the Federal Court here in

this district?

A. Yes, I was.

Q. What was nature of those proceedings.

A. We had filed a writ of habeas corpus

claiming that James Earl Ray was being held

illegally, and after four years proceeding

through state and federal courts, in October,

1974, a two-week evidentiary hearing was held

here in Memphis in the Federal District

Court.

Q. Was there a range of evidence that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

498

was reviewed at that time?

A. Yes.

Q. And did some of that evidence have to

do with the origin of the shot related to the

window sill in the bathroom of the rooming

house?

A. Yes.

Q. And could you summarize for the Court

and the jury that evidence, the evidence that

pertained to that aspect of the case.

A. Well, at James Earl Ray's guilty plea

hearing on March 10, 1969, the District

Attorney for the State of Tennessee, James

Beasley, had made a representation to the

Court as to certain evidence that the state

would have proved had there been a trial.

Among that he stated that they would

prove by expert testimony that there were

markings on the window sill from which the

shot was allegedly fired that could be

consistent with markings on the underside of

the barrel of the rifle that was the alleged

murder weapon, that is, the rifle that was

found in front of Canipe's Amusement Store at

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

499

422 and a half South Main Street.

That statement came under attack,

and we felt that it was a misrepresentation

to the Court by the state's attorney. In

fact, nearly a year before that statement was

made, the FBI had conducted tests on the

window sill, and the FBI tests reflected that

they could not match the alleged murder

weapon to a dent in the window sill.

Secondly, we put on at the evidentiary

hearing the testimony of an expert witness,

Professor Herbert Leon McDonnell.

Professor McDonnell did his own test

on the window sill, and he concluded that you

could not even determine the class of object

that made the dent in the window sill, not

only could you not link it with a particular

rifle, you couldn't even tell that it was

made by a rifle.

Then, third, subsequently, bearing

on that point, as to whether or not the fire

was -- whether or not the rifle was fired

from that window. I subsequently represented

a man by the name of Harold Wiseberg in a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

500

Freedom of Information Act lawsuit which went

on for a decade and ultimately obtained about

sixty thousand pages of FBI records.

Among those records were reports by

the FBI on their examination of the window

sill, and it included a statement that no

powder residues were found on the window

sill.

Q. Mr. Lesar, let me ask you to look at

two documents, one dated April 7th, 1968, the

other dated April 11th, 1968. One is a

bureau-tell from the Washington office of the

Federal Bureau of Investigation to the local

office, and the other is an FBI report.

A. Yes.

Q. Would you look at those two documents

and tell the Court if those were documents

that you -- copies of those documents that

you obtained under your Freedom of

Information Act application?

A. Yes. These are documents from the

FBI file on Dr. King's assassination. This

is called the MURKIN investigation,

M U R K I N, which is an FBI acronym that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

501

stands for murder of King. These report the

results of their lab tests. They were

obtained by me for my client, Mr. Harold

Wiseberg, in the Freedom of Information Act

lawsuit that we filed in 1976.

Q. Would you read from the report

document, if you would, the language with

respect to the window sill.

A. Yes. In this document the window

sill was referred to as Exhibit Q-71, and the

report states, and this is under date of

April 11, 1968, just a week after the

assassination, "The Q-71 board bears a recent

dent which could have been produced by a

light blow from the muzzle of a weapon such

as the Remmington rifle, Serial Number

461475, previously submitted in this case.

"The dent contains microscopic

marks of the type which could be produced by

the side of the barrel at the muzzle but

insufficient marks for identification were

left on the board due to the physical nature

of the wood."

And then skipping down just a little

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

502

bit, "No gun powder or gun powder residues

were found on the Q-71 board."

MR. PEPPER: Thank you. Your

Honor. I move to admit these as Plaintiffs 2

and 3.

(The above-mentioned documents

were marked Exhibits 2 and 3 respectively.)

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) So Mr. Lesar, is it

your testimony here this afternoon that

though District Attorney General Beasley

informed the jury at the guilty plea hearing

that in fact expert testimony, expert

laboratory testimony, would establish that

the dent in the window sill came from the

murder weapon in the case, the alleged murder

weapon in the case, that in fact within three

days of the killing, they had one report in

their hands which indicated that was not

possible?

A. The second report is dated --

actually the first in chronological sequence

is dated April the 7th, which is three days

after the murder.

Q. After the killing. Then a second

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

503

report within a week after the killing?

A. Yes.

Q. That they had those two reports from

the FBI which indicated that such --

A. They are clearly inconsistent.

Q. -- is not possible?

A. They are clearly inconsistent with

Beasley's representation to the Court.

Q. When was the guilty plea hearing

again?

A. March 10, 1969.

Q. So almost a year later they still

were saying experts were going to show that

window sill dent came from the murder

weapon?

A. Yes.

MR. PEPPER: No further

questions.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Let me ask you a few questions,

Mr. Lesar.

A. Sure.

Q. When you refer to the statement by

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

504

District Attorney General Beasley, do you

know if the experts that he was referring to

were FBI experts?

A. It had to be the FBI. As these two

documents that have been introduced show, the

exhibit was sent to the FBI for testing. The

document in question -- both of the documents

in question come from FBI headquarters and

are directed to the FBI's local office in

Memphis.

Q. But you haven't seen the District

Attorney's file, so you really don't know if

they were referring to other experts or not,

do you, when he made this statement?

A. To the best of my knowledge, no other

testing was done. It was sent to the FBI for

testing.

Q. And in the hearing that you referred

to in federal court, did you offer any

evidence or proof that the shot was fired

from some other location other than the

window sill?

A. Yes. My recollection is that we did.

Q. What other proof was offered, if you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

505

recall?

A. Now you are asking me to go back

twenty-five years. I think that, among other

things, Professor McDonnell testified that it

was not possible to fire the rifle from the

bathroom window.

He went into an explanation based on

the mathematics, the size of the rifle.

You've got to understand in front of the

window from which the shot is fired is a

bathtub or was a bathtub, and you would have

to be a contortionist to be able to fire a

shot from that bathtub through the window

standing with at least one foot on the rim,

maybe with both feet on the rim of the

bathtub.

He said in his testimony that you

couldn't even fit the rifle in the required

space, because you had a right angle. The

wall and the bathtub is up against this wall,

the window is here right in front of it, and

the rifle couldn't fit in.

Q. Were any independent tests performed

by anyone when you were doing this to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

506

indicate that the rifle -- the shot had been

fired from another location other than the

window sill?

A. The only -- Professor McDonnell made

an examination, a microscopic examination, of

the bullet, which by that time had become

three bullet fragments, but he disputed --

his examination concluded contrary to the FBI

representation that it should be possible to

identify the rifle -- whether or not that

rifle fired that shot.

Q. But, I mean, did you have any

evidence of any sort, any tests that were

done, to indicate that it was fired in the

brush area behind the rooming house?

A. There were no tests that we did at

that time, no. Subsequently the House Select

Committee on Assassinations did a two-year

investigation of the King assassination and

concluded that both the bathroom -- the

rooming house bathroom and the area of the

clump of bushes directly opposite the

Lorraine Motel were both consistent with the

ballistic evidence as to the angle of the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

507

shot. So it could have come from either

place.

MR. GARRISON: That's all.

Thank you.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further,

Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right. You may

stand down.

THE WITNESS: Thank you.

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: Call your next

witness.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiffs call Ambassador Andrew Young.

May we approach, Your Honor?

(Bench conference outside the

presence of the court reporter.)

ANDREW YOUNG

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Ambassador Young.

A. Thank you.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

508

Q. Thank you very much for interrupting

your schedule and coming here to be with us

this afternoon.

Would you state your full name and

address for the record.

A. It is Andrew Young, 1088 Veltra

Circle, Atlanta, Georgia.

Q. And Ambassador Young, what do you

presently do?

A. I'm chairman of a small consulting

firm called Good Works International, and

we're attempting to help American businesses

share in African development.

Q. Previously what posts have you held?

A. Well, I was executive vice-president

of the Southern Christian Leadership

Conference in the 1960's, and I was member of

Congress from the State of Georgia in 1972 to

1977, and then I was Ambassador to the United

Nations from 1977 to 1980, and I was mayor of

Atlanta from 1981 to 1990.

Q. You've had a very long career in

public service?

A. A blessed career.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

509

Q. Back in 1968, what position did you

hold with the Southern Christian Leadership

Conference?

A. I was executive vice-president of the

Southern Christian Leadership Conference.

Q. What did your duties entail?

A. I was I guess officially the chief

administrator and did some organizing, some

fund raising. I started out essentially

training most of our staff through a

citizenship education program. But by 1968 I

was largely serving as executive secretary to

Martin Luther King.

Q. Right. Were you very much involved

in the planning of the Poor People's March on

Washington, that project?

A. I was, and it was Dr. King's concern

that America was plagued by, as he said, the

triple evils of racism, war and poverty. And

we had been involved in dealing with the

problems of race relations.

He had been active trying to put an

end to the war in Vietnam, and this was his

attempt simply to get America to see, in his

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

510

words, that we would not exist with people

isolated on lonely islands of poverty amidst

this ocean of material wealth.

The situation in Memphis was typical

of that problem because you had men who were

working all week long and were still making

less than the poverty wage. And they were

trying to organize in order to negotiate to

be recognized as a union so they could get up

to the poverty wage. And they asked him to

come here in support of them.

Q. So there was significant

compatibility between the situation in

Memphis with the striking sanitation workers

and the projection later on that spring for

the Poor People's Campaign in Washington?

A. It was. In fact, we in the midst of

organizing the Poor People's Campaign in

Washington, and most of us felt that we

shouldn't get bogged down in local issues,

that it had to be addressed at the national

level, but he didn't feel as though he could

allow these men to be, you know, just left

alone.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

511

Q. Did you notice a great deal of enmity

of Dr. King because of his positions against

the war and behalf of the poor?

A. There had always been a great deal of

enmity. It increased significantly after the

war in Vietnam. We didn't know how much it

had increased, though. But starting with --

actually, it started when he won the Noble

Prize when J. Edgar Hoover said he was the

world's most notorious liar.

We couldn't understand what that was

all about. So we went to see Mr. Hoover and

had what we thought was a very successful and

satisfactory meeting: Later, after we left,

though, Mr. Hoover reported it quite

different than we thought had took place.

So it seemed as though there was

a -- well, there was an effort to undercut us

behind our backs, though whenever we talked

with them about it personally, they were very

polite and very congenial and even agreeable.

Q. Did you see an increase if the

threats against Martin King's life during

this period of time, between 1967 and 1968?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

512

A. We actually didn't see an increase in

the threats. There had always been threats.

We always thought that the threats were from

the kooks and we really didn't pay much

attention to them.

It wasn't until we actually were on

the way to Memphis that they emerged again.

Leaving Atlanta, the plane stopped, and they

said there was a bomb threat and everybody

had to get off the plane: But we hadn't had

that for years since the days of Selma and

Birmingham in 1964 and 1965.

Q. Was that April 3rd, the day that you

travelled from Atlanta to Memphis?

A. That's right.

Q. You travelled with the party that day

and arrived with Dr. King. Is that right?

A. I'm not sure. I think I was already

there. You think you had come in earlier. I

came in earlier because I had to testify in

the court on the injunction.

Q. That's right. You were representing

him in court at that time, weren't you?

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

513

Q. Do you remember seeing him on April

3rd when he did arrive?

A. I saw him that afternoon, he was

really feeling bad. And he had a bad cold.

I didn't realize it at the time, but I think

he was probably upset by the emergence of a

threat. But he didn't want to do the mass

meeting. I just thought he needed a rest.

Q. He ended up going to the mass

meeting?

A. We ended up going to Mason Temple,

and there was -- I think it seats about

eleven thousand people, and there was -- it

was jam-packed and people all out in the

streets. So we went back to the motel and

called him and told him that he just needed

to come and that Ralph Abernathy would make

the main speech but he just needed to show

his face and greet the crowd.

Q. What happened at that meeting?

A. Well, Ralph did an eloquent job of

introducing him, but he then went on to give

one of the greatest speeches of his life.

Q. Now, the next day, April 4th, what

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

514

were your movements, what did you do?

A. I went to the courtroom early that

day and I stayed in the court all day long.

Q. When did you return to the motel?

A. I returned to the motel after the

court adjourned about four o'clock.

Q. Did you see him at that time?

A. I went by his room to report on what

had happened. Much to my surprise, he was

feeling as jovial and as happy as I had ever

seen him.

When I walked in the door, he

snatched a pillow off the bed and through it

at me and said, where you been all day long.

I said, I've been Court. He said, oh, don't

hand me all that crap. He started beating me

with the pillow.

I mean, he was just feeling very

lighthearted and playful, which was a change

from his mood, you know, up until that

point. So we were just really glad to see

him feeling good again.

Q. This would be about two hours before

the assassination. What did you do for the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

515

remainder of that afternoon?

A. Well, actually we were -- they were

eating, had been eating, and I think his

brother had come to town, and there were, oh,

half a dozen or so folks sitting in this room

where they had two double beds, so people

were just sitting all over the floor and

everything and just talking, relaxed and

having a good time, until about -- well,

actually by the time I got down there it was

probably closer to five. And because about

five-thirty or so we said if we were going to

dinner, we thought he ought to go up to his

room to, you know, to wash up and get ready

to go out to diner.

Q. So he went back to his room around

five-thirty or so to get ready to go?

A. Five-thirty, maybe even later,

quarter to six, somewhere around there.

Q. Where did you go at that point?

A. I just stayed right there in the

parking lot. In fact, we were just sitting

around talking. Jessie Jackson had just come

in and Hosea Williams and others who had been

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

516

gathering.

So everybody was just sort of

milling around in the parking lot waiting to

go to dinner. At Reverend Kyle's house.

Q. Did you notice Dr. King come out on

the balcony at one point sometime a little

bit later closer to six?

A. He came out ready to go, but it was

getting cool, and because he had a cold and

had been feeling bad the day before, we were

suggesting that maybe he ought to go back and

get a coat. He was standing up there

thinking about whether or not he should get a

coat.

Q. Then what happened?

A. Actually, a shot rang out. We

thought it was a fire cracker or a car

backfiring. I mean, nobody thought it was a

shot.

I looked up there, and he had fallen

down. It was so -- well, it was so shocking,

and he had been so playful before, I thought

he was clowning until I ran up there and saw

that he had actually been shot.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

517

Q. What were your first movements after

you heard the shot and saw him fall down?

A. I ran right straight to the top of

the stairs.

Q. You turned and ran straight up?

A. Yeah.

Q. You didn't look across the road

or --

A. I didn't.

Q. That's all right. You just ran up to

the --

A. I ran up to see him.

Q. You ran up the stairs. The rest is

history, of course. He died soon after.

Now, Ambassador Young, of course, time is

precious and you are on a very tight schedule

as well, did you in recent years come to

consider the events of April 4th and the

assassination of your friend and colleague

again?

A. I did. And it was largely because

people began to come forth and give actually

Martin's children new information which we

didn't have before.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

518

Q. And that would be within the last,

what, three, four years, somewhere around

there?

A. I guess over the last three years.

Q. And then how did this new information

that you didn't previously have come to you?

Was it brought to you by members of the

family?

A. It was brought to me largely by

Dexter, Martin's second son.

Q. And upon receiving it, did you begin

to consider again what had happened to Martin

King?

A. Well, I think we always felt that we

didn't know what happened. There were always

questions that we deliberately did not take

the time to answer.

It is hard to explain to his

children, but the way he trained us was that

his death was probably inevitable but that

death should not stop the movement. So we

were much more concerned about keeping his

work going than we were about finding out who

was responsible for his death.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

519

So that's basically what we devoted

ourselves to. We continued the Poor People's

Campaign. We were active in the election.

We continued to organize workers and to

preach non-violence and teach, and we were

having some success. I was then involved in

politics. And it was largely because we

thought this was the way to carry on his

work.

Q. You were perpetuating the legacy,

then?

A. Yeah. In fact, Ralph Abernathy's

sermon was where they tried to kill Joseph in

the Bible, and the Bible says Joseph's

brother said let us kill the dreamer and we

will see then what will happen to his

dreams.

We were determined that though they

might have killed the dreamer, that his

dreams would live on. And that we saw our

responsibility in keeping those dreams alive,

because we knew we could not bring him back.

Q. Ambassador, as a result of the

family's new awareness and concern about the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

520

events that took away their husband and

father, did you -- were you asked to

participate in a meeting with an individual

who came into the frame in this case and who

is the defendant here, Mr. Loyd Jowers?

A. Yes, I was. I was told that -- well,

actually I got the impression, whether I was

told this specifically or not, that

Mr. Jowers was getting older, he wasn't very

well, and it was almost like he wanted to get

right with God before he died. That's the

impression I had. Whether those were words

that he ever actually used or not, I don't

know.

When we met with him, that was still

the impression that I had, that here was a

man who had a lot on his mind and a lot on

his conscience and who wanted to confess it

and be free of it.

Q. Do you recall how long ago you had

that meeting with Mr. Jowers?

A. About a year, I guess. I don't

remember the exact date.

Q. About a year ago?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

521

A. Yes.

Q. And that year ago, that meeting, was

that the first time that you had heard a

number of the facts, the accounts, that

Mr. Jowers put forward?

A. Well, actually I had heard them

before, and I just would not let myself think

about them. I think Reverend Joseph Lowery

had either met with Mr. Jowers or knew of

Mr. Jowers, and he had mentioned some of

these questions.

I had talked with James Orange, who

was on our staff, who was there with us, and

James had always been I think concerned about

all of the questions that were not raised.

I think the reason I focused on

Mr. Jowers was that I couldn't imagine that

the man who ran the bar or the grill right

across the street had not been interviewed by

the police or the FBI or no testimony had

been taken from him, is what I heard.

Q. Who was present at this meeting with

Mr. Jowers that you attended?

A. Dexter, his attorney, and you serving

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

522

as Dexter's attorney. I think it was

Mr. Garrison. There was one other person who

videotaped what was going on.

Q. And Mr. Jowers?

A. And Mr. Jowers.

Q. Could you in the time remaining

summarize for us -- we have a tape-recording,

Ambassador, of that meeting, we're going to

ask you to authenticate that, but we're not

going to play it this afternoon in the

interest of time, but could you the remaining

moments before we do that, could you

summarize for the Court and the jury what

Mr. Jowers told you and Dexter King at that

meeting?

A. Well, he said that he was the

proprietor of Jim's Grill, I think.

Q. Uh-huh.

A. And that he was a retired Memphis

police officer and that a lot of police

officers hung out at his place. He said that

he hadn't lived such a good life, he had a

lot of drinking and gambling problems, and

that he was in debt to somebody that he

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

523

identified as the head of the Mafia in

Memphis who called him up and that he was

nervous about him and afraid that he was

calling to collect the money which he didn't

have, and the guy said, no, forget about

that, I just need you to do me a favor.

He said somebody is going to bring

you a package, and you put it in your store

room, and when I bring -- I think the head of

the Mafia also ran a produce company from

which Mr. Jowers got his vegetables and meat

supplies. And he said, when you get your

supplies, there is going to be a plastic bag

in the supplies, and take it out, it is going

to have money in it, and give it to the

person who brings you the package. And he

said he did that.

He said that he didn't know what was

going on, he was just doing as he was told.

He also said that there were a number of --

well, he went on to tell the story I think

first that some man who looked Spanish came

and brought him a package. He didn't know

what was it in, he said, but he put it in his

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

524

storeroom and he gave the guy the package

with the money in it.

Then he said he got a call telling

him that at six o'clock he should go to the

back door of his store.

Q. On April 4th?

A. April 4th. He says he didn't know

what was going on but that there had been

people meeting in his store, and he said

there had been a meeting with a couple of

policemen, Memphis policemen that he knew and

three others that he didn't know, and he

remembered because he said they were sitting

in a booth and he had to put another chair at

the end, and that they were -- he didn't know

what they were doing.

But he said when he went to the back

door, just as he got to the door, a shot rang

out, and somebody came out of the bushes and

handed him a smoking rifle, and he broke it

down and wrapped it in a table cloth and put

it back in the storeroom.

He said the guy who handed him the

rifle was a fellow who had been on the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

525

Memphis police force with him that was a

friend of his who he used to go hunting with

and was quite a good marksman. I've

forgotten his name.

Q. That's all right.

A. But he said that the next day --

well, he said the next morning, when he came

to work and went back out to see what was

going on, because he said then he realized

what had happened, and he went back and he

said all of the bush, shrubs, behind his

store where the guy came from, all of them

had been cut down and the whole area had been

swept clean. And that later on somebody came

back -- the same guy came back and got the

rifle from him, and he took it and he never

saw it again.

Q. Did he -- do you recall if he said

what he did with the spent cartridge, the

shell that was in the rifle when he took it?

A. You know --

Q. That's all right.

A. I'm --

Q. It is a detail.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

526

A. I'm thinking, and I'm not sure, but I

think he might have said he threw it down the

toilet.

Q. Yes.

A. He broke the rifle down and he kept

it and then gave it to this person, the man

who came to pick it up.

Q. The next day. Did he say whether he

had ever told that story to any officials or

anyone before or after?

A. Well, he said nobody had ever come to

talk to him about it.

Q. Ambassador Young, did you get the

impression that this was a man sitting before

you at a table telling you this story who was

trying to make some kind of money, some kind

of profit, who had some kind of literary or

other project in mind?

A. No. I got the impression -- in fact,

we had to break the session several times

because he had coughing spells. This was a

man who was very sick who was like wanted to

come to confession to get his soul put

right.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

527

Q. He is not here today, and this is the

first time he has not been here because he

has not been feeling well. So that's maybe

indicative of his health. Did you,

Ambassador Young, believe what you heard from

this man?

A. Well, I believed everything but the

fact that -- I believed he kind of knew what

was going on. He was trying to say that he

was innocent and he didn't know this was a

gun, he didn't look in the package

beforehand, and it wasn't until after the

event, but he was very well aware that there

was some planning.

In fact, he said one of the guys who

was in there in the restaurant at that table

was the fellow that was kneeling down over

Martin's body when -- that ran up there with

us when -- I think there is a picture where

when the police heard the shot, everybody

started running toward where Martin was, and

we were standing up there pointing back there

saying, it came from over there.

But they were running away from

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

528

where the shot came from, and they couldn't

do anything there, and we were trying to get

them to go back over to see where -- see who

had fired the shot. And that picture that

has been shown all over the world, there is a

fellow kneeling there who he says was the

fellow who was in the restaurant a few days

before with two Memphis policemen and two

guys that he said looked like federal men.

Well, he said government, government men.

Q. It is a historical fact that that

kneeling figure is an undercover police

officer named Merrell McCullough. He is

identified.

Ambassador Young, I'd like you to

listen to just a bit of this tape to ensure

that this in fact is the recording that you

recognize of the meeting and authenticate it

not in its entirety but at the beginning in

terms of those people present.

(Tape played as follows:

Dexter, what you been up to? Mr. King: Well,

I've been keeping busy, just working hard.)

MR. PEPPER: Stop there.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

529

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Do you recognize that

first voice?

A. I recognize Dexter's voice.

Q. Did you recognize the first person

speaking?

A. No, I didn't.

(Tape continued to be played as

follows: Mr. Jowers: You know who I am,

don't you? Mr. King: I do, I do.)

A. That's Mr. Jowers.

(Tape played: Mr. King: I was

working late one night in my office when I

talked to you. Yeah. You know, keeping all

things moving forward and just still trying

to deal with this issue. This is a very

trying issue because, as you know, my family,

particularly my mother, have been concerned

about, because the media has been very

vicious. Mr. Jowers: Oh, yeah. Mr. King:

In trying to discredit, an attack, you know,

on the family, and we hope we would get to

the bottom of this so we can move on. I

think in order to have true closure, you have

to -- you know, you have to get it out. You

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

530

have to get it out in the open. So we

appreciate your willingness to open up and

come forward. As you know, we continue to

support immunity for you. As you know, the

District Attorney doesn't seem like they want

this story to come out. So it appears they

are shoving everything down. I think that

would be a major tragedy. Mr. Jowers: Oh,

it would be. Mr. Young: I don't think I

would be out of order in saying if something

happened and you were indicted for anything,

then I would sure be willing to come over

here and testify on your behalf.)

MR. PEPPER: Do you recognize

your voice?

A. Yes, I do.

Q. Do you recognize those words?

A. I do. Because we were impressed with

the fact that -- well, we have always had a

no-fault analysis on this. We were not

trying to punish anybody.

We were approaching this more like

they approached it in South Africa, that in

order to have a real reconciliation, you have

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

531

to know the truth. And that if you can get

the truth out -- I'm sure that a lot of

people that have a lot of terrible guilt

feelings like Mr. Jowers just don't have his

courage and are not probably as far along in

life as he is.

Q. Ambassador Young, as far as you can

hear at the outset and the beginning of the

tape, do you recognize the voices of

Mr. Jowers, yourself and Dexter King?

A. That's right.

Q. This is a tape-recording that was

made at the time?

A. It was made at a motel near the

airport in Little Rock.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you very

much. No further questions.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Good afternoon, Ambassador Young.

How are you today?

A. Good.

Q. Let me ask you a few questions. I

promise you I won't keep you long.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

532

We just heard on the tape Mr. Jowers

I believe explained to you and Mr. Dexter

King that he had no knowledge that this

was -- that Dr. King was the target of this

assassination, said he didn't even know there

would be one. Am I correct, sir?

A. He did say that.

Q. He said he was simply carrying out

what he thought was a favor to someone that

he owed a favor to and was called upon to do

certain things in his restaurant?

A. And he said he did it because there

was a certain amount of fear that he had of

this person.

Q. The first time that Dr. King had

stayed at the Lorraine on this date or had he

stayed there before, the day of this -- on

this trip?

A. No. I think this -- I think he

lived -- when he came for the march, he

stayed downtown, or he was taken to a

downtown hotel. He didn't really have a

hotel room. He flew -- he left New York

early in the morning, like a six o'clock

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

533

plane, and flew into Memphis and went to the

march or to the church, and it was after the

march was disrupted downtown that he was

taken to the Holiday Inn, I think, just to

get him out of the crowd and out of the mob.

Q. Now, you were down in the courtyard

when the shot was fired.

A. I was.

Q. You weren't able to tell exactly

where it came from or which direction it came

from?

A. Yeah, I could tell that it came from

across the street.

Q. Did it first sound like a firecracker

or a car backfiring?

A. It sounded like a firecracker or a

car backfiring. I'll tell you, when I saw

the wound in Dr. King's body, I knew it had

to come from directly across the street.

Q. Did you have any discussion with

Mr. Dexter King about the previous meeting he

had with Mr. Jowers before this meeting that

we had?

A. I did.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

534

Q. Did Mr. King at that time also tell

you that Mr. Jowers indicated to him that he

had no knowledge that Dr. King was the target

of the assassination, had no idea if there

would even be an assassination when he was

called upon by someone to take whatever acts

he did?

A. I don't recall that he told me the

details. He simply said that since the

family was interested in giving amnesty to

everybody involved, that Mr. Jowers had come

forward and was willing to talk to the

family.

Q. There was some effort put forth by

Reverend Lowery to try to get immunity for

Mr. Jowers. Am I correct, sir?

A. That's correct.

Q. I believe you and Mr. Dexter King and

all wanted immunity granted to him. Am I

correct, sir?

A. We really did, yes.

MR. GARRISON: That's all.

Thank you, sir.

THE COURT: Mr. Pepper.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

535

MR. WILLIAMS: Just briefly,

Your Honor.

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Ambassador, how long approximately

did that meeting -- roughly did that meeting

with Mr. Jowers take?

A. It was almost four hours, I think.

It was a long time. It was all afternoon.

Now, he was not talking all that time. We

had several breaks. But we were altogether I

think almost four hours.

Q. All tolled?

A. Yes.

Q. Was there a lot of repetition of

things said, questions asked and answers

given?

A. There was some but not a lot. But

however we asked the question, Mr. Jowers

answers were pretty much consistent. And,

again, we were not cross-examining him trying

to refute anything he was saying. We were

simply trying to understand what actually

happened from his point of view.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

536

Q. Did you get an understanding at the

end of that period of time?

A. I got the understanding that he felt

as though he had been involved in the

assassination of Dr. King and he regretted it

very much. In fact, he said as much to

Dexter.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further,

Your Honor. The tape that is here, your

Honor, is approximately two hours in length.

It covers the first two hours of that session

and all of that discussion. We move its

admission and would like it to be played to

the jury in its entirety on Monday.

THE COURT: Very well.

(The above-mentioned tape was

marked Exhibit 4.)

(Jury out.)

(The proceedings were adjourned

at 4:50 p.m.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

537

IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF SHELBY COUNTY,

TENNESSEE FOR THE THIRTIETH JUDICIAL

DISTRICT AT MEMPHIS

_______________________________________________

CORETTA SCOTT KING, et al,

Plaintiffs,

Vs. Case No. 97242

LOYD JOWERS, et al,

Defendants.

_______________________________________________

PROCEEDINGS

November 22nd, 1999

VOLUME V

_______________________________________________

Before the Honorable James E. Swearengen,

Division 4, judge presiding.

_______________________________________________

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI,

RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

COURT REPORTERS

Suite 2200, One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

(901) 529-1999

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

538

- APPEARANCES -

For the Plaintiff: DR. WILLIAM PEPPER

Attorney at Law

New York City, New York

For the Defendant:

MR. LEWIS GARRISON

Attorney at Law

Memphis, Tennessee

Court Reported by:

MR. BRIAN F. DOMINSKI

Certificate of Merit

Registered Professional

Reporter

Daniel, Dillinger,

Dominski, Richberger &

Weatherford

22nd Floor

One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

539

- INDEX -

WITNESS: PAGE/LINE NUMBER

TAPE OF DEXTER KING/ANDREW

YOUNG/LOYD JOWERS PLAYED

TO THE JURY........................... 542 19

ARTHUR HAYNES, JR.

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER......................... 645 19

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:...................... 662 24

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:........................ 667 21

BOBBIE BALFOUR

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:........................ 671 9

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:...................... 680 2

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:........................ 682 21

RECROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:...................... 684 4

WILLIAM R. KEY

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:........................ 684 20

JOE B. BROWN

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:........................ 690 23

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

540

(November 22nd, 1999, 10:15 a.m.)

THE COURT: Mr. James, would you

bring the jury out, please.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: Good morning, ladies

and gentlemen. Glad to see that all of you

survived the weekend. We're going to proceed

with our trial at this point.

Mr. Pepper, what's your next order

of proof?

MR. PEPPER: Yes, Your Honor.

If it please the Court, we'd like to --

plaintiffs would like to continue where we

left off with Ambassador Young's testimony by

going directly into the tape-recording of the

meeting that he described with the

defendant.

Though the Court may wish to break

from time to time, we -- the plaintiffs feel

it is important for the jury to hear the

entirety of that tape.

THE COURT: I believe you said

Friday it is about two hours long?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

541

MR. PEPPER: We believe it is

about two hours.

THE COURT: It might get too

exciting for us.

MR. PEPPER: We might have to

take a break after an hour or so.

THE COURT: Whatever pleases the

Court. Thank you.

THE COURT: We'll begin with

that. Go ahead.

If you would just explain to the

jury the circumstances under which this tape

was made, where it was and then it might be a

little more meaningful.

MR. PEPPER: The tape was made

approximately a year ago, as Ambassador Young

testified. And it was made here in the State

of Tennessee. The participants at the

meeting were the defendant, Mr. Loyd Jowers,

his attorney, Mr. Louis Garrison, Ambassador

Andrew Young and plaintiff Dexter Scott

King.

They came together for the purpose

really of discussing the underlying cause of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

542

action in this case, Mr. Jowers' role in

respect to the killing of Martin Luther

King.

While there is introductory

information and some banter occasionally, we

would ask the Court and the jury to listen

carefully to the various questions and the

responses to those questions.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, we'd

like to have it started at the very

beginning.

MR. PEPPER: Yes, sir. I've

asked the technician to start it from the

beginning.

THE COURT: All right. Go

ahead.

(Tape played for the jury in

open court as follows:)

"LOYD JOWERS: Dexter, what you

been up to?

DEXTER KING: Well, I've been

keeping busy, working hard, traveling a lot.

LOYD JOWERS: You work a lot at

night, don't you?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

543

DEXTER KING: I do. You

remember. I was working late one night in my

office when I talked to you.

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

DEXTER KING: Keeping, you

know, keeping all things moving forward, just

still trying to deal with this issue. This

is a very trying issue, because, as you know,

my family, particularly my mother, I've been

concerned about because the media has been

very vicious --

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, yeah.

DEXTER KING: -- in trying to

discredit and attack, you know, the family.

We had hoped that we would get to the bottom

of this so we can move on. I think in order

to have true closure, you have to get it

out. You have to get it out in the open.

So we appreciate your willingness to

open up and come forward. As you know, we

continue to support immunity for you, but, as

you know, the District Attorney doesn't seem

like they want the story to come out. So it

appears they are shutting everything down.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

544

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

DEXTER KING: I think that

would be a major tragedy.

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, it would be,

definitely.

Don't you think so, Mr. Young?

ANDREW YOUNG: I do. In fact,

I think that -- I don't think I would be out

of order in saying if something happened and

you were indicted for anything, then I would

sure be willing to come over here and testify

on your behalf as having been -- as having

been very helpful to us in trying to

understand that. We would want to make sure

that nothing happened to you.

LOYD JOWERS: Well, you know,

this is what I don't understand, and I never

did understand it about President Kennedy:

That they know there has got to be a

conspiracy. Why they won't admit that and go

from there on the basis of prosecution,

whatever they have to do, I don't understand

why they won't do it.

LEWIS GARRISON: Mr. Jowers, Mr.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

545

King and and Mr. Young have read the account

of this that I had written from what you had

and I had talked about. So they want to

question you.

LOYD JOWERS: Okay. Any time

you get ready.

LEWIS GARRISON: Feel free to go

forth.

DEXTER KING: When we last met,

you had pretty much taken us I think up to a

point where you had received the rifle from

Lieutenant Clark.

DEXTER KING: And you thought

it was a 30-30, you said, and you might have

been mistaken, that it was a 30-06.

LOYD JOWERS: I very well could

have been. Let me tell you that I knew he

owned a 30-30. I couldn't swear that that

was Clark that I took it from, but I believe

it was.

Now, see, it happened just about

that quick. (Snap of fingers.) I was at the

back door at six-oh-clock like I was supposed

to be. How many seconds did it take him to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

546

hand me that rifle and get going? That was

just a split second.

LEWIS GARRISON: You said it was

still smoking?

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, the smoke was

still coming out the barrel of the rifle. I

breached it. Of course, that's what you've

got to do before you break one down.

LEWIS GARRISON: Clark had been

back that night, that afternoon?

LOYD JOWERS: He had been in the

place that day, yeah.

LEWIS GARRISON: Had you seen

him go in the back?

LOYD JOWERS: He went back and

looked out the back. You see, the way the

grill was laid out, up here is where all your

customers are. The kitchen is here. Back

here we've got a storeroom. He walked all

the way back.

Of course, I was there working, you

know. I didn't really pay attention to him.

Of course, he was a friend of mine.

ANDREW YOUNG: You met him by

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

547

the back door by the storeroom?

LOYD JOWERS: You are talking

about that night?

ANDREW YOUNG: Yes.

LOYD JOWERS: Yes, I met him --

yes, I was at the back door.

ANDREW YOUNG: Out of the

storeroom?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

ANDREW YOUNG: And he came up

from the woods back there or bushes?

LOYD JOWERS: From the bushes.

ANDREW YOUNG: And he handed you

the rifle?

LOYD JOWERS: About that quick.

All I got was a glance of him. I had the

back door standing open. I didn't have to

open the door or anything. It was standing

open. The rifle was smoking.

I'll put it like this: I thought it

was a 30-30. I didn't examine it. I didn't

have time. All I done was get that empty

shell out of it, and there were no other

shells in it but that one. That's all that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

548

was in there.

The rifle was smoking. I broke it

down right quick, put it up under my apron,

walked up to the front, set it underneath the

counter. I wrapped it in a table cloth

first.

I stuck it under the counter and

went on up to the front of the building. By

the time the police got there, it took them

about two, two and a half minutes to get

there, I didn't have time to see nobody or do

nothing getting up there that quick. Of

course, I was working by myself.

ANDREW YOUNG: You had heard

the shot before you went to the back?

LOYD JOWERS: No, I was already

in the back.

ANDREW YOUNG: You were already

in the back at six-oh-clock?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

ANDREW YOUNG: You heard the

shot from from back there?

LOYD JOWERS: One shot is all I

heard.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

549

LEWIS GARRISON: You'd been told

to be back there at six, hadn't you?

LOYD JOWERS: I had been told to

be back there at six, yeah, that a man was

going to pass me a package. He didn't tell

me what it was. I certainly didn't know he

was going to shoot anybody, especially Dr.

King, the fact it turned out to be.

What I would have bet was a 30-30,

but it could have been a 30-06. There is not

that much difference in them if you ever

compared them. There is not that much

difference in them. They both break down

about the same way. I didn't have to break

it down, but I was told to --

ANDREW YOUNG: Did you used to

go hunting with Mr. Clark?

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, yeah. I went

hunting with him. Never went with him any

more after that, though.

LEWIS GARRISON: You said you

and Mr. Clark worked at the police department

at same time, that you were a police officer

at the same time he was?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

550

LOYD JOWERS: He come on the

police department just a short time before I

got off. But now we went hunting down in

Mississippi pretty regularly, went hunting on

Rex Chenault's place down in Mississippi,

down below Hernando.

ANDREW YOUNG: Is Mr. Clark

still alive?

LOYD JOWERS: I think he is,

isn't he?

LEWIS GARRISON: No, he is dead.

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, is he?

LEWIS GARRISON: His wife is

still living, though. Mr. Barger is dead.

The only one that is still living is

Officer Zachery, who was in and out of the

grill, wasn't he?

LOYD JOWERS: Well, unless I'm

mistaken about this, Officer Zachery was in

charge of the men that was in charge of Dr.

King's security. Now, I could be wrong about

that, but that's what I thought.

LEWIS GARRISON: He was in and

out of the grill some, Officer Zachery.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

551

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, yeah.

LEWIS GARRISON: Merrell

McCullough was there, that's one of the first

ones you ever mentioned?

LOYD JOWERS: McCullough, yeah.

LEWIS GARRISON: How was he

identified? How was he introduced to you,

Merrell McCullough? Who introduced him to

you?

LOYD JOWERS: I don't remember

if it was Clark or Johnny Barger. It was one

or the other of them.

Now, Johnny Barger was my partner.

We were policemen together. He is the one

who introduced me to Frank Liberto. We used

to go there quite often. They was real good

friends.

Of course, I got to be pretty good

friends with Frank, because he could do you a

lot of good in Memphis, especially on the

police department.

DEXTER KING: Did you know

Frank's family, like his wife?

LOYD JOWERS: I met her one

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

552

time, but as far as really knowing her, I

can't say I did. I never was out with her

ever at a party or anything.

DEXTER KING: Do you know her

name?

LOYD JOWERS: I always called

her Ms. Liberto.

LEWIS GARRISON: Is she still

living?

DEXTER KING: Is she still

living?

LOYD JOWERS: I think she is.

Dexter, you do remember I'm hard of

hearing, don't you? I only hear about thirty

percent in this ear. That's the reason we're

taping this, because sometimes I don't get a

question right. If I don't get it right, I

can't answer it right.

LEWIS GARRISON: They took -- I

don't know if you and Mr. Young are aware or

not, but the FBI questioned Mrs. Liberto, who

was the mother of Mr. Liberto, and his

brother, who was on the police force, and

I've got copies of those statements.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

553

DEXTER KING: Was his brother

Charles?

LEWIS GARRISON: A Memphis

police officer. They had a picture of Mr.

Ray. They all asked if they knew him, and

they said they did not but he looked

familiar, like someone they had seen around.

DEXTER KING: When they saw the

picture of Ray you are saying they thought it

was somebody --

LEWIS GARRISON: Mr. Ray claimed

in his deposition he had gone to New Orleans

to meet with Raul. In her affidavit and

also his brother and I believe someone else,

they all said Mr. Ray's face looked familiar.

DEXTER KING: Was the brother a

police officer in New Orleans?

LEWIS GARRISON: Yeah. He is

retired now. He is still there, as far as I

know.

DEXTER KING: Does he have a

business?

LEWIS GARRISON: He may. I'm

not sure, to be honest with you. I'm not

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

554

sure. He is retired from the police

department. He may have a business. I'm not

sure.

DEXTER KING: Do you know

anything about his brother, Charles?

LOYD JOWERS: The one that lives

in New Orleans?

DEXTER KING: I think so.

Charles.

LOYD JOWERS: No, sir. I never

did know Charles. Now, I heard of him.

Frank told me about him. But I never met

him, as far as I can remember. I never met

Charles.

DEXTER KING: What about in Dr.

Pepper's book he talks about the market, I

think L&M or I think L&L, Latch & Liberto?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah, over on

Scott Street.

DEXTER KING: Okay. I think

there was a Frank Liberto, a produce dealer,

and a Frank Liberto --

LEWIS GARRISON: There were

three of them.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

555

DEXTER KING: There were three.

LEWIS GARRISON: A car salesman,

liquor store owner and produce dealer.

DEXTER KING: I was going to

ask you did you know all of the three or any

of the three?

LOYD JOWERS: The only one I

knew was Frank. He is the one that always

called me. Like I say, I handled that one

hundred thousand dollars for him. But it

wasn't the first time I handled money for

him. But it was the last time.

DEXTER KING: Let me

understand. They would ask you to receive

the money. They would send it over in a

box?

LOYD JOWERS: With my produce,

yeah, in the bottom.

DEXTER KING: Then somebody

would pick it up from you?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

DEXTER KING: Pick up the box.

Okay. Now, in the case of the one hundred

thousand that they sent over, did they tell

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

556

you that it was for, you know --

LOYD JOWERS: They never told me

what -- none of the money I handled for them

over the years, they would never tell me what

it was for, just that it would be in there.

This time they told me how much it was. But

I didn't count it. I did not. I never

counted it.

LEWIS GARRISON: Describe for

them what it looked like, Mr. Jowers.

LOYD JOWERS: Well, it was in

one-hundred-dollar bills. Heck, I don't know

how thick it was. About like that. Two

rubber bands around them, one on each end.

It was in a brown paper bag.

ANDREW YOUNG: It was in with

your vegetables?

LOYD JOWERS: It was underneath

my vegetables, it sure was.

DEXTER KING: Now, who picked

up that box?

LOYD JOWERS: First Frank called

me and told me there will be a Cuban by to

pick it up. He said, you give him that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

557

package. That's when he told me that there

was a hundred thousand dollars in it.

I told him, said, Frank, you know I

ain't going to count that money. If it is a

hundred thousand, that's fine. If there is

not that much, that will have to be fine,

too.

Then he called me back -- let's

see. That was on a Wednesday morning. Then

he called me back and said, now, that wetback

is going to be by there to get that package

that is going to be handed in that back

door. He called him a wetback. I never

heard a Cuban called a wetback. So I don't

know if it was a Cuban or a Mexican, but it

was definitely a foreigner.

DEXTER KING: Was that Raul?

LOYD JOWERS: That's what they

said his name was. I don't believe that was

his name anymore than I believe yours is Jack

Thomas.

DEXTER KING: Why is that?

LOYD JOWERS: I just don't

believe that. Why would a man use his own

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

558

name when he is involved in something like

that? Why would he do that?

No, he would use Jack Jones or --

but Raul, I was going to look that up and

see what that stands for in a foreign

language. I'm not sure what it stands for.

But it is very common among foreigners.

LEWIS GARRISON: You at first

thought he said Royal, didn't you?

LOYD JOWERS: I thought he said

Royal, I sure did. But he corrected me and

told me Raul. I said, well, whatever.

LEWIS GARRISON: Did you know

any of Frank Liberto's close friends, who his

close friends were?

LOYD JOWERS: Well, the lady

that owned a restaurant out on in Highland

Heights.

DEXTER KING: Is that Lavada

Whitlock Addison?

LOYD JOWERS: Ms. Whitlock,

right. Now, I met her one time back along

about that time. She wasn't all that old a

woman, either. I don't remember what the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

559

occasion was, but I did meet her. Of course,

I knew Nathan over the years after the

assassination took place. I knew Nathan real

well.

DEXTER KING: That was her

son?

LOYD JOWERS: Pardon?

DEXTER KING: Nathan was her

son, right?

LOYD JOWERS: Yes, sir.

DEXTER KING: Now, he knew

Liberto as well?

LOYD JOWERS: He knew him real

well. See, Ms. Whitlock owned a restaurant

out on Highland Heights, on Macon Road, I

believe. I believe that's where it was.

Frank used to stop in there all the time.

The fact is he tried to go to bed

with her all the time, Mrs. Whitlock. He may

have. I don't know. Anyway, he'd get oiled

up, get drunked up, and he'd do a lot of

talking.

DEXTER KING: Do you know any

other friends of his or were those the only

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

560

two?

LOYD JOWERS: You know, apart

from the people on the police department,

Johnny Barger, I'm not sure if Cross was a

friend of his or not, but I know Johnny

Barger was.

We used to be in a squad car in a

territory and we'd leave our territory and go

over on Scott Street to his place of

business. Sometimes we'd stay but a few

minutes, then other times we'd stay longer

than that.

See, you have to understand that

back then, back then everything was done

politically. If you got anywhere, you had to

know somebody that knew somebody. It is

almost that way now, but it was really,

really bad back then. There was no blacks on

the police department, it was just an unheard

of thing.

ANDREW YOUNG: Was that Crump

time? Was Crump in office back then?

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, yeah. Crump

is the one that got me the job. I went to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

561

see him on a Monday, and on a Thursday I went

to see the police commissioner. That Monday

morning I was riding in a squad car with a 38

hanging on my side, billy stick hanging on

this side. That's just the way things

operated back then.

ANDREW YOUNG: Were you in the

military?

LOYD JOWERS: I was in the Navy,

yes. I had been discharged out at

Millington, I don't know, less than a year

after I went on the police department.

Jobs were kind of hard to find back

then. They were doubly hard for black

people. It was hard enough for white people,

but it was tough on blacks back then to find

a job.

DEXTER KING: Any other friends

that come to mind of Mr. Liberto's?

LOYD JOWERS: No, I can't think

of any more. I really can't.

DEXTER KING: What about in

Texas, did you know of any of his

relationships with friends in Texas?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

562

LOYD JOWERS: Who? Frank?

DEXTER KING: Yes.

LOYD JOWERS: No, sir, I didn't

know any. I didn't know he had people

there. I knew he had a brother that lived in

New Orleans.

DEXTER KING: So you weren't

aware of any business he may have been in

Texas or New Orleans?

LOYD JOWERS: No.

DEXTER KING: You just knew he

had a brother?

LOYD JOWERS: I knew he had a

brother that lived in New Orleans. I don't

remember who told me. I don't think Frank

told me, but he said he was in the same

business that Frank was in. And by that --

DEXTER KING: You mean produce?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah. Yeah. And

in the Mafia.

DEXTER KING: When did he first

talk to you about the killing?

LOYD JOWERS: About the killing

of Dr. Martin Luther King?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

563

DEXTER KING: Uh-huh.

LOYD JOWERS: After it took

place. After it took place.

DEXTER KING: The thing I read

is a little confusing from Mr. Garrison, the

part about -- I thought it said that Frank

Liberto was discussing this potential riot or

March beforehand.

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, we talked

about that, sure. But there was no killing

mentioned, no.

DEXTER KING: Okay. But when

he said or alleged that he said that he would

go home with his toes in the air, sticking in

the air or something, sticking up, that if he

comes here, in other words, he will leave

dead, I mean, that's the way I interpreted

it.

LOYD JOWERS: If Frank Liberto

ever told me that, I don't remember. But I

wouldn't doubt him saying that. I would

not. Because that's just the way he was.

DEXTER KING: So you don't

remember talking about the killing until

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

564

actually after it took place?

LOYD JOWERS: If he -- he didn't

mention it until after the fact. I do not

remember.

DEXTER KING: When he did, what

did he tell you, when he finally mentioned

it?

LOYD JOWERS: He asked me a

question. He didn't come down to the place.

He called me on the phone. He said, do you

know what that bundle money was for? I said,

well, I have no idea. He said, well, that's

what it cost me to get King killed.

Word for word, that's what he told

me. I almost dropped the damn telephone.

Well, you know, it surprised me. I figured

it was to buy guns with or dope or whatever

it was he was dealing with.

DEXTER KING: So you were

surprised? You were really shocked?

LOYD JOWERS: I certainly was.

Why, sure I was. Now, if there was no

conspiracy -- let me pass this by you. If

there was no conspiracy, Dr. King, whenever

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

565

he come up to Memphis, he checked into the

Rivermont Hotel where he stayed when he come

to Memphis. Everybody knew that. I knew it,

even. I kept up with him not real close.

You know, the black people that come in my

restaurant, we'd talk about it. I'd carry on

a conversation with them.

The very next day, I think the very

next day, they moved him over to the

Lorraine.

Okay. Now -- I can't remember her

name. Anyway, the lady that runs the place.

DEXTER KING: Ms. Bailey?

LOYD JOWERS: Ms. Bailey. She

put him downstairs. They almost -- I don't

think he stayed downstairs one night. They

almost immediately moved him to the second

floor.

Now, there had to be a conspiracy.

I couldn't have done it. James Earl Ray

couldn't have done it. There had -- it had

to be his security people or the CIA or the

FBI. It had to be.

DEXTER KING: Did you know of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

566

anybody else who may have mentioned the plot

before, you know, it happened other than

Liberto? I mean, did anybody mention the

possibility that this might happen or that it

was going to happen to you?

LOYD JOWERS: I don't remember

anyone mentioning it black or white. I

really don't. I had about half my

customers -- I'm talking about overall about

half black and half white, because I was in a

mixed neighborhood. Which was fine with me.

I didn't care what color they were. You

know, I always tried to see that everybody

had enough food when they left. But to my

knowledge, no one ever mentioned that.

ANDREW YOUNG: Mr. Jowers, do

you mind saying how old you are now?

LOYD JOWERS: I'm just passed

seventy-one. November 20th I'll be

seventy-two. I have glaucoma in both eyes.

I've got a cataract on this one.

ANDREW YOUNG: But you are

looking pretty fit, though?

LOYD JOWERS: I am. I exercise

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

567

every day. I do. I exercise every day.

Hell, I may live to be a hundred, but I don't

believe it. I smoke two packs of cigarettes

every day.

LEWIS GARRISON: You told

Mr. King before about a meeting that was held

in your place where some people identified

themselves as --

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah. Do you

remember me telling you that?

DEXTER KING: I do.

LOYD JOWERS: About these

policemen meeting there.

LEWIS GARRISON: The CIA and

FBI -- (Inaudible).

LOYD JOWERS: The CIA and the

FBI were there, but they weren't there the

same time all those policemen were there.

They were not there at the same time. But

that wasn't unusual. Cab drivers would meet

in there, policemen met in my place.

ANDREW YOUNG: This is all

before Dr. King was killed?

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, yeah, this

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

568

all took place before. Very rarely did they

have any more meetings after the -- if a

policeman came in, it would be be Johnny

Barger or Clark or someone like that that

would just stop in for a minute.

DEXTER KING: So did you ever

overhear anything that they were saying or

did you have a sense for what they were

meeting about?

LOYD JOWERS: Now, I would be

working. You know how it is in a

restaurant. I would be working and I'd pick

up a word. I wouldn't know what the meeting

was about. What was discussed, I couldn't

say. Of course, I would only get a word now

and then from going by the table.

DEXTER KING: Now, you said

they didn't meet together. You mean the

Memphis police met separately from the CIA?

LOYD JOWERS: In the past,

yeah. See, this CIA business with the FBI on

my part of it was just guesswork, because

they always wear plain clothes.

ANDREW YOUNG: Did they come

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

569

together, the FBI and CIA?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah, they was

together.

ANDREW YOUNG: But not with

the --

LOYD JOWERS: They were not with

the -- now, there was one stranger who was

with the police that I never seen before or

after the meeting. That was with Johnny

Barger and Clark. I just don't remember who

all was at that meeting. Like I say, I was

working. They had been there spending

money. Of course, I waited on them.

LEWIS GARRISON: How many times

was Merrell McCullough there before this?

LOYD JOWERS: How many times

what now?

LEWIS GARRISON: How many times

was Merrell McCullough in there before this

meeting?

LOYD JOWERS: How many times was

he in there? I can't remember. He could

have been in there when I wasn't even

around.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

570

LEWIS GARRISON: But you saw him

in there several times?

LOYD JOWERS: I saw him several

times, sure.

LEWIS GARRISON: He was

introduced to you as a police officer, wasn't

he?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

LEWIS GARRISON: Johnny Barger

told you that was his assistant or --

LOYD JOWERS: I believe he was a

sergeant at that time.

LEWIS GARRISON: Barger?

LOYD JOWERS: No.

LEWIS GARRISON: Merrell

McCullough?

LOYD JOWERS: McCullough. I

believe he was a sergeant when Dr. King got

killed. I think he was.

LEWIS GARRISON: Was he in a

police uniform when you saw him?

LOYD JOWERS: No.

LEWIS GARRISON: He was not?

LOYD JOWERS: No. He was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

571

plainclothed whenever he would come in the

restaurant. I never did see him in his

uniform. Now, Johnny Barger always came in

his uniform.

DEXTER KING: Tell me again,

because I just want to make sure I've got the

details down, when you received the money,

who brought the produce to you, the produce

box?

LOYD JOWERS: One of Frank's

regular drivers. I don't recall his name, I

really don't, if I ever knew his name.

DEXTER KING: Do you remember

when you received it, what date and time,

that kind of thing?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah. They

brought my produce on Wednesday.

DEXTER KING: Okay. This was

afternoon or --

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah, it would be

in the afternoon. I opened up about five

o'clock, got lunch ready, I wouldn't go home

until four o'clock in the afternoon.

DEXTER KING: Then Frank called

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

572

you that afternoon?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

DEXTER KING: To ask you

whether you received it?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

DEXTER KING: What did he say

about the money?

LOYD JOWERS: He described

this -- he called him a Cuban the first time,

then he called him a wetback after that. So

I don't know. He was a foreigner, anyway.

DEXTER KING: What did he say

about the money? He just said the money was

in the box?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah. He didn't

tell me where. I knew it was hid then the

bottom of it

DEXTER KING: He asked you if

you had counted it?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

DEXTER KING: You said no, you

weren't going to count it?

LOYD JOWERS: That's the first

and last, only time, he ever asked me if I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

573

had counted it.

DEXTER KING: Okay. But then

what did he say you were supposed to did with

the money?

LOYD JOWERS: He said put it up

until tomorrow, there will be a wetback or a

Cuban by there to pick it up. I said, well,

okay. So I put it in the old cook stove I

didn't use, because nobody ever went in

there, and I knew they didn't. But they

couldn't have got by me anyway.

DEXTER KING: So did the Cuban

come and pick it up?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah, the next

any. The next day.

DEXTER KING: That's the person

that is alleged to be Raul?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

DEXTER KING: Was that your

first time ever seeing him?

LOYD JOWERS: If he had ever

been in there before then, I didn't know it.

Now, I won't tell you he wasn't in there, but

I didn't know if he was.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

574

DEXTER KING: So you just gave

him the money panned that was it?

LOYD JOWERS: Sure. He walked

on out the door. Same way when he come and

picked that rifle up I took in the back

door. He come in, picked it up, hit that

door, turned right north on Main Street, and

I haven't seen him anymore since then.

DEXTER KING: That was Clark?

LOYD JOWERS: No, I'm talking

about Raul.

DEXTER KING: I'm sorry. I was

confused. You said you haven't seen him

since he came to the back door. Is that what

you said?

LOYD JOWERS: I'm talking about

the guy that picked the rifle up the next

day, the one that actually --

DEXTER KING: Is that the same

guy you gave the money to?

LOYD JOWERS: Yes, same guy.

DEXTER KING: Same guy?

LOYD JOWERS: Same guy.

DEXTER KING: Okay.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

575

LOYD JOWERS: Now, they said it

his name was Raul. It could have been.

DEXTER KING: What's confusing

is I think that -- I thought that the person

who picked up the money was different from

the person who picked up the rifle.

LOYD JOWERS: No.

DEXTER KING: It was the same

person?

LOYD JOWERS: Same person.

ANDREW YOUNG: But a different

person gave you the rifle?

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, yeah,

definitely.

ANDREW YOUNG: Who gave you the

smoking rifle?

LOYD JOWERS: That was a white

man that gave me the rifle. I could see that

much.

LEWIS GARRISON: Wait a minute,

Mr. Jowers. You are getting confused. You

are talking about after the shot was fired?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

LEWIS GARRISON: A white man

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

576

gave you -- this white man gave you a rifle

after the shot was fired?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah, in the back

door.

LEWIS GARRISON: You are pretty

sure that's Clark?

LOYD JOWERS: I'd almost swear

to it. But now as far as getting a good look

at him, I did not, because the thing really

took (snapping of fingers) that fast.

LEWIS GARRISON: But the person

who brought the gun in was the one he called

a wetback?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

LEWIS GARRISON: Then the person

when came back and got it was --

LOYD JOWERS: The same person,

sure was.

ANDREW YOUNG: Let's see.

We've got three trips: One that they came to

pick up the money. That was the same man

that brought you the rifle?

LOYD JOWERS: The same man that

picked it up, yeah.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

577

ANDREW YOUNG: He brought you

the rifle?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

ANDREW YOUNG: He picked up the

money. Then he came back and picked up the

rifle?

LOYD JOWERS: Now, wait a minute

now. There is a misunderstanding here

somewhere. I never seen a rifle in my

restaurant until after the killing.

LEWIS GARRISON: You said they

brought in a box.

LOYD JOWERS: There was a box.

How would I know? It had never been opened.

I don't know what it was. Now, there was a

box.

LEWIS GARRISON: A long box?

LOYD JOWERS: It was big enough

for that rifle to go in.

ANDREW YOUNG: Raul brought

that -- I mean the Cuban had brought that

box?

LOYD JOWERS: The same guy.

There are three trips he made.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

578

ANDREW YOUNG: Okay.

LOYD JOWERS: That's right.

DEXTER KING: Okay. So he

brought the box after the produce was

delivered, the long box?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah, he brought

that separate.

DEXTER KING: But he didn't

deliver the produce?

LOYD JOWERS: No.

DEXTER KING: That came from

Frank's market?

LOYD JOWERS: Frank Liberto.

LEWIS GARRISON: You bought from

them pretty regularly? You bought all your

produce from them, didn't you?

LOYD JOWERS: The same driver,

yeah. It was the same driver.

LEWIS GARRISON: How long had

you owned Jim's Grill at that time?

LOYD JOWERS: I opened that

grill up I believe in either late 1966 or

early 1967.

LEWIS GARRISON: You had been

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

579

buying produce from this same place all the

time?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah. If Frank

didn't have something, I would get it from --

ANDREW YOUNG: Do you remember

what it was, what kind of produce it was with

the money?

LOYD JOWERS: That day?

ANDREW YOUNG: Uh-huh.

LOYD JOWERS: If I thought about

it long enough, I could remember. Well, I

know I ordered three or four stalks of

celery, because I was going to have soup.

You have to have celery to go in soup.

Anyway, I know that celery was in there and

maybe a head or two of lettuce. Just what

you would use in a restaurant.

DEXTER KING: Then when he

brought the long box -- when was that

brought?

LOYD JOWERS: What time of day?

DEXTER KING: Was this the same

day?

LEWIS GARRISON: Was it the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

580

same -- are you talking about the same day he

brought the produce in?

DEXTER KING: Right. The same

day?

LOYD JOWERS: You know, I don't

believe it was. I don't think there was but

that one delivery that day. You know, I

don't believe that long box was brought when

I was -- you know, I believe that long box

was brought when I wasn't there. That would

have been the next day. That would have been

the day that Dr. King got killed.

DEXTER KING: Who came and got

the long box? Who came and got the rifle?

How did they get the rifle?

LOYD JOWERS: If it was a

rifle. If it was a rifle.

DEXTER KING: Okay.

LOYD JOWERS: Raul would have

had to have picked it up. He had to come

after it, because I never give that long box

to no one else.

DEXTER KING: Where did you put

it?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

581

LOYD JOWERS: Under the

counter. Under my -- you know, you have a

long counter. I put it up under the

counter. Now, it wasn't wrapped up or

anything. It was just along box. It was

about that thick, about that wide. It wasn't

all that long. Maybe as long as this table.

DEXTER KING: They told you to

store it?

LOYD JOWERS: Just hold on to

it.

DEXTER KING: So they came back

to get it when you weren't there?

LOYD JOWERS: I don't remember

giving it to anyone, I don't. I do not.

ANDREW YOUNG: And the police

never searched your store?

LOYD JOWERS: No, never. I

talked to one. He said he was FBI. That's

the next day.

ANDREW YOUNG: But they never

searched your place?

LOYD JOWERS: No, sir.

ANDREW YOUNG: Never looked

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

582

back in the back in the storeroom?

LOYD JOWERS: No, sir. To my

knowledge -- it had a full basement

underneath that place. To my knowledge, they

never went down there. As far as I know,

they didn't.

Now, I thought that was kind of

strange. There could have been a half dozen

people down in that basement, you know. Of

course, there wasn't nothing down there.

DEXTER KING: Who owned the

produce company that sent you the vegetables?

LOYD JOWERS: Who owned it?

DEXTER KING: Who owned it?

LOYD JOWERS: Well, I always

believe Frank Liberto owned it. But that

don't mean he did. He always said he owned

it, anyway.

DEXTER KING: Did Latch have

any --

LOYD JOWERS: I don't know. I

can't answer that.

DEXTER KING: Did you know

Latch?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

583

LOYD JOWERS: Pardon.

DEXTER KING: Latch, do you

know Latch? Is he still living?

LOYD JOWERS: No. I met him one

time. As far as knowing anything about him,

I don't.

DEXTER KING: I wanted to go

back to the meeting with McCullough. Did he

come in with the Memphis Police officers or

with the Feds?

LOYD JOWERS: No, he come in

with the Memphis Police. I believe there was

a total amount of five. The reason I say

that, we had two people sit here and two over

here at a booth, and I took them a chair, so

there had to be five.

I know one I had seen -- I know one

I had never seen before and haven't seen him

since. Now he could have been FBI, could

have been CIA. I don't know.

DEXTER KING: You never heard

their conversation, but you had a sense of

what they were meeting about?

LOYD JOWERS: I knew it was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

584

something illegal. I knew that part of it.

I would pick up a word now and then. I knew

they were up to something illegal, sure I

did. I wasn't really too concerned about it

because I didn't want to know about it. I

really didn't.

DEXTER KING: Did anybody else

see the money that you received?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah. Betty

Spates says she saw it. Now, whether she did

or not, I don't know.

LEWIS GARRISON: One of the

other ladies that worked there?

LOYD JOWERS: She described it

to me.

LEWIS GARRISON: Her sister?

LOYD JOWERS: I'm almost sure

she saw it.

LEWIS GARRISON: Two of them

did.

DEXTER KING: How would she

have seen it? Did she go and look in the --

LOYD JOWERS: She would have had

to have opened that oven up, the old stove,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

585

and looked at it.

LEWIS GARRISON: We have taken a

deposition from her.

DEXTER KING: Now, Betty Spates

was the black waitress?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

DEXTER KING: And you had a

relationship with her. Is that correct?

LOYD JOWERS: That's true.

DEXTER KING: Would she have --

I'm wandering around a little bit because I'm

going off my memory.

LOYD JOWERS: I'm following you

pretty good. Go ahead.

DEXTER KING: Did she say that

she saw you run in with the rifle?

LOYD JOWERS: She said that,

Dexter, but she couldn't have because she was

not there that night. She was not.

Now, I was the only one working that

night. If Harold Parker was still living, he

would tell you that. He would also tell you

I went to the back door at six o'clock, too.

He was sitting -- there a row of booths

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

586

here. He was sitting sitting in the back

booth, and the back door was down here. And

the back door was standing open.

DEXTER KING: What did Frank

tell you about the murder weapon? I remember

before we met -- when we met before, he said

something about he said it was his property.

LOYD JOWERS: He said it was

his, yeah, he sure did.

DEXTER KING: But that was

after you retrieved it and put it under --

well, let me ask you.

LOYD JOWERS: When he told me

that, I had already given i to Raul or

whatever his name was.

DEXTER KING: The next day?

LOYD JOWERS: He didn't tell me

the next day, I don't think. Two or three

days later after that I talked to him.

DEXTER KING: No. I'm saying

when did you give it to Raul?

LOYD JOWERS: I give it to him

early the next day, sure did.

DEXTER KING: April 5th?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

587

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah, the very

next day.

DEXTER KING: Okay. But

Liberto didn't know that Raul was picking it

up?

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, yes, he did,

too. I wouldn't have give it to him if

Liberto hadn't told me. I believe he called

him a wetback, he would be there to pick that

package up you got in the back door.

Of course, after the shooting took

place, then I knew what that damn rifle had

done, I really had.

DEXTER KING: You had put it

all together then?

LOYD JOWERS: Sure. It wasn't

very hard to put together. I knew I was

right in the middle of it. So all I could do

from then on was keep my damn mouth shut.

That's what I done. That's what the

Mafia knew I would do. But I don't know. I

don't think we'll ever get any more with it

myself. Well just have to see.

ANDREW YOUNG: McCullough is a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

588

pretty young man?

LOYD JOWERS: He was young back

then.

ANDREW YOUNG: He will be

around a long time.

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, yeah.

LEWIS GARRISON: That is thirty

years ago. He'd probably be -- (Inaudible).

LOYD JOWERS: Don't he work for

the CIA now?

ANDREW YOUNG: That's what I

thought.

LOYD JOWERS: That's what I

heard.

LEWIS GARRISON: Yeah.

LOYD JOWERS: That's what I

thought. That's what I heard. I didn't know

that for sure.

LEWIS GARRISON: If this was

thirty years ago and -- I think he would have

been in his twenties back then, and this was

thirty years ago.

LOYD JOWERS: I think the only

way we're ever going to be able to prove that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

589

this conspiracy is to get the FBI and CIA's

records on it. It is common knowledge, white

and black both know, that J. Edgar Hoover

hated Dr. King with a personal passion.

ANDREW YOUNG: But there

wouldn't be any record of it.

LOYD JOWERS: You don't think

they would make records on something like

that?

ANDREW YOUNG: No.

LOYD JOWERS: Well, you are

probably right. It wouldn't be too smart to,

would it? How do you prove it?

ANDREW YOUNG: Well, it is very

difficult to prove. That's the reason why

we've advocated what they did in South

Africa, declare general amnesty and let

everybody come forward and clear their

conscience.

LOYD JOWERS: Now, that would

work if they did that.

ANDREW YOUNG: And it would

help -- I think it would help the country.

LEWIS GARRISON: I do --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

590

(Inaudible.)

DEXTER KING: Let me ask you,

Mr. Jowers, I know you are really afraid of

being indicted if you come forward, but what

if you were to come to the media, tell your

story, like maybe talk to a reporter who is

friendly, I mean, somebody who we feel would

be sensitive, they wouldn't try to paint you

in a -- you know, in a negative light, but

just tell the story the way it happened, not

the way you've been dealt with in the past,

you know, by some of the media.

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah, right.

DEXTER KING: But what if they

did a print story first and then you followed

that up immediately, like let's say the story

came out in the morning and you call a press

conference that day and you told your story

in front of a host of reporters where they

can't isolate you, you know, like with ABC

Prime Time and Turning Point, you know, they

could control the message, whereas if you do

you it in a live press conference, they can't

edit it, they can't spin it in a way that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

591

they want it to be, how would you feel about

that?

LOYD JOWERS: If I thought it

would do any good, I'd do it in a minute. I

think what it will do -- I'm going to tell

you what I think, Dexter. If I thought it

would do any good, I would do it in a

minute. But let me tell you, if I do that

without immunity, the first damn thing a

prosecutor in Memphis is going to do is get

me indicted.

Now, you can just believe that or

not, but that's what will happen. He has

already said he has got enough evidence to

indict me but he don't have enough evidence

to get a conviction. That's the reason I'm

not indicted right now. I guarantee you it

is.

ANDREW YOUNG: They would

indict you for being part of a conspiracy?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah, they sure

would.

LEWIS GARRISON: They did make

that statement.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

592

LOYD JOWERS: Sure they did.

The fact is I've investigated it. I had four

or five beers in my belly, and I called him.

I said, you son-of-a-bitch, do you think I'm

scared to you? You are wrong.

DEXTER KING: Was this Cook?

LOYD JOWERS: What was that

guy's name?

LEWIS GARRISON: Glankler?

LOYD JOWERS: Mark Glankler.

That's who it was. I sure called him, got

him out of a meeting. I told him, I said,

hell, I'll come over and talk to you in a

minute.

LEWIS GARRISON: They never did

talk to you?

LOYD JOWERS: Ug-huh. He didn't

have a whole lot to say. I went off on him.

I sure did do it.

LEWIS GARRISON: From the time

this occurred on April 4th, 1968, they never

talked to you about any part you had in it?

LOYD JOWERS: No, never have.

Whenever I went down to the police station

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

593

the next day -- maybe it was the next day. I

think it was on the 6th. I went down and

gave them a statement, you know, about who

was in there.

Of course, that had just happened.

I remembered everybody that was in the

place. I knew most all of them. I knew all

of them personally, even the black guy they

put in, Frank Holt, I knew him personally.

But as far as them asking me anything, no.

DEXTER KING: What was Holt

doing there? Do you know?

LOYD JOWERS: All I know is what

he told me. He was going to work at the

produce place. Damn, I can't remember the

name of it. It wasn't Frank Liberto's

place. It was the one over on Front Street.

LEWIS GARRISON: I can't think of

the name of it, either.

LOYD JOWERS: Well, Carter's,

that's where he worked.

DEXTER KING: Did the rifle

have a scope on it?

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, yes, sure

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

594

did. Clip-on kind.

LEWIS GARRISON: The problem

with wht Mr. Holt is saying, Mr. Jowers, is

they didn't operate at night over at the

produce company, did they?

LOYD JOWERS: To my knowledge,

they closed around five o'clock.

LEWIS GARRISON: I don't know

that he had anything to do with this case at

all.

LOYD JOWERS: I don't know,

either. Not really.

LEWIS GARRISON: There is

nothing to indicate that he ever had anything

to do with it at all. You never told anyone

he had anything to do with it?

LOYD JOWERS: All that detail

that come out on ABC was Willie Akins' idea.

ANDREW YOUNG: Was there

anybody black other than McCullough that was

in on the early planning?

LOYD JOWERS: Not that I know

of. There could have been.

ANDREW YOUNG: But he was the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

595

only one that showed up in your place?

LOYD JOWERS: He is the only one

that ever showed up down there that had

anything to do with it. If there was any

more, if Jones was involved in it -- that was

Dr. King's driver. I knew him pretty well.

Is he still living?

DEXTER KING: People talk and

say they have seen him, but nobody has been

able to really pinpoint or locate him.

LOYD JOWERS: I hadn't seen him

in years. But I did know him.

LEWIS GARRISON: Last fall, a

year ago, Mr. Young, you've heard of an

Officer Redditt, an African-American, I had a

chance to talk to him a long time, and --

have you ever talked to him, Mr. King?

DEXTER KING: No, I haven't.

LEWIS GARRISON: He said that he

was there and, as you know, had been watching

Dr. King and I guess Mr. Young when they were

in Memphis, and he told me he was startled

because he had no knowledge of anyone ever

threatening him and had no reason to. The

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

596

first thing he knew, some officer came, I

forget the name of the officer, and got him

and took him to the police department, and

the police commissioner was there along with

who they identified as FBI agents and told

him that he had received a threat.

They took him to his home. An

officer went home with him to make sure he

stayed there. He said he knew what was going

on. By the time he got home, he heard about

the assassination. (Inaudible.) Strange

thing to me, though -- I've seen so many

strange things -- there is Mr. McCullough,

undoubtedly with the police department it has

been established, there he was, an

African-American on the scene, yet Officer

Redditt and the firemen, they were removed.

DEXTER KING: I think the point

you made was he was not interviewed as a

witness.

LEWIS GARRISON: Never. Not in

the police department or anywhere. His name

doesn't appear. He is shown in the pictures.

ANDREW YOUNG: Sam Donaldson was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

597

the first one that pointed him out to me. He

said he was with Army intelligence and that

he was there to make sure that Dr. King was

dead.

LOYD JOWERS: Make sure Dr. King

was what?

ANDREW YOUNG: Was really dead.

DEXTER KING: He was checking

his pulse when he leaned over.

LEWIS GARRISON: I heard he was

supposed to give some type of a sign if he

wasn't.

(Reporter note: At this point

the tape ends and picks up with the following

statement by Mr. Jowers:)

LOYD JOWERS: Snub .38, a

short-shot .38. It was and snub nose.

That's four-inch of barrel. It shot a

projectile about that long. They called it a

short .38. They didn't make many of them. I

got it stolen from me.

LEWIS GARRISON: Mr. Jowers, you

told Mr. King, too, before what happened to

the casing of the bullet. What did you do

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

598

with that?

LOYD JOWERS: I put it down -- I

tried to bend it together. Well, I did bend

it together. I put it down in the commode

and flushed it. It didn't go down. It

stopped the damn commode up. Anyway -- this

is the next day. I got it out. That night,

whenever I closed, I drove across the

Mississippi bridge, and about in the center

of it I throwed it over the side while I was

driving along. It is in the bottom of the

Mississippi River, the actual shell, the

casing.

DEXTER KING: What time did

Lieutenant Clark -- what time did you see him

on April 4th? Like how many times or what

time did you see him in the grill? Was he in

before the actual shooting?

LOYD JOWERS: He had to be there

before ten o'clock, because I left there

about ten, ten-thirty.

DEXTER KING: That was in the

morning?

LOYD JOWERS: In the morning,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

599

yeah.

DEXTER KING: What was he doing

there?

LOYD JOWERS: Pardon?

DEXTER KING: What was he doing

there?

LOYD JOWERS: He just stopped by

like the policemen used to always do.

ANDREW YOUNG: That was

Mr. Clark?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

DEXTER KING: This is on April

4th?

LOYD JOWERS: This was on the

day of the assassination, yeah. I don't

think Johnny Barger come by that day, but I

know Clark did.

ANDREW YOUNG: But now Clark had

to come into the -- into your store and had

gone out through the back?

LOYD JOWERS: He didn't go all

the way to the back. You mean that

afternoon?

ANDREW YOUNG: That afternoon.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

600

LOYD JOWERS: It is a long brick

building.

ANDREW YOUNG: I know it.

LOYD JOWERS: It had an opening

over here. All he had to do was walk in

front of that fire station, walk on into

the -- no, he didn't have to come through my

place.

ANDREW YOUNG: What I was trying

to figure out is how did the rifle get out in

the backyard.

LOYD JOWERS: Clark had to carry

it out there, if he is in fact the one that

had it.

ANDREW YOUNG: So he carried it

from the back of your store?

LOYD JOWERS: Wait a minute. He

carried it from his car or a car. It could

have been a police car for all I know. I

wasn't back there. He carried it from the

street. Here is the fire station over here.

It ran around behind my store right around to

wherever it was he wanted to do the shooting

from, I guess.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

601

ANDREW YOUNG: But the box was

in your store on the day before?

LOYD JOWERS: The box had been

in my store, but I didn't give it to anyone.

That's what I'm telling you. I did not.

ANDREW YOUNG: Okay.

LOYD JOWERS: But now someone

picked it up. But I didn't give it to no

one. I couldn't swear it was a rifle. I

think it was. Which anyone -- you know, I

just didn't.

ANDREW YOUNG: But you are

pretty sure that when you were standing at

the back door, Clark gave you a smoking

rifle?

LOYD JOWERS: I'm sure it was

Clark.

ANDREW YOUNG: And then you put

it under the counter?

LOYD JOWERS: I broke it down

and put it under the counter. I breached

it. You know how you take the empty shell

out.

ANDREW YOUNG: Yeah.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

602

LOYD JOWERS: I broke it down

into two pieces, wrapped it in a table cloth,

put it up under the counter and put some more

towels on top of it. That's where it stayed

until the next day.

ANDREW YOUNG: And it was Raul

that came back and picked it up?

LOYD JOWERS: He didn't do

anything with it except left it wrapped in

that table cloth. He went out the front door

with it.

LEWIS GARRISON: What did he

tell you he came in for that day, Mr. Jowers?

LOYD JOWERS: What did who say?

Raul?

LEWIS GARRISON: Raul or Royal,

whatever --

LOYD JOWERS: He come to pick

that rifle up.

LEWIS GARRISON: Did he tell you

he came to pick the rifle up?

LOYD JOWERS: He asked me if I

had a package for him. I said, well, sure,

I've got it under the counter, I got it last

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

603

night. He said, that's what I'm asking for.

He was real short about it, like if

I wasn't going to give it to him, he'd blow

me away. Anyway, I give it to him, and

that's the last I seen of him.

DEXTER KING: Do you recall an

hour before the killing there was a phone

call made to Frank Liberto about -- in

Pepper's book they talk about this guy

McFerren overhearing a comment about "get the

SOB when he is on the balcony" or something

like that.

LOYD JOWERS: There was no phone

call that I know of made from my restaurant

whatever. I had a pay phone, but there was

not one made from my restaurant. If it

was --

DEXTER KING: You don't have

any idea who Liberto might have been speaking

with?

LOYD JOWERS: No, I do not.

Now, I had heard that, and I don't doubt it

taking place, but all I know is if somebody

made a phone call from my place, they would

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

604

have stepped inside and they called back

there while I was working. I was running

that place myself that night because I had no

help.

ANDREW YOUNG: Did you tell the

help to stay home?

LOYD JOWERS: No, sir.

ANDREW YOUNG: They just stayed

home accidentally?

LOYD JOWERS: I don't know if it

was accidental or not. I always wondered

about that, you know, because they were good

workers. Betty was a good worker, always

come to work.

ANDREW YOUNG: Is she still

alive?

LOYD JOWERS: Yes, she is still

alive. She lives in Memphis somewhere.

ANDREW YOUNG: Do you know where

she lives?

LEWIS GARRISON: She gave her

deposition.

LOYD JOWERS: She give a

deposition. She lives at 931 Roland.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

605

LEWIS GARRISON: I'm not sure.

Something like that.

LOYD JOWERS: That's where she

lives. I understand she either has sold the

house or done something with it and moved. I

have no idea where.

DEXTER KING: You mentioned a

pay phone. Where was it located?

LOYD JOWERS: Right in the front

of the building. There was a front door --

like there is a front door here. The pay

phone was between the front of the building

and my steam tables. Now, someone could have

stepped in and used that phone.

DEXTER KING: You don't

remember anybody --

LOYD JOWERS: I don't remember

seeing anybody.

DEXTER KING: -- about

four-thirty?

LOYD JOWERS: I sure don't.

That don't mean someone couldn't have stepped

in that door and used that phone and I never

would have known about it. Because I was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

606

trying to wait on everybody in the place. I

think I had it full of customers, and I was

trying to wait on them.

DEXTER KING: Did you discuss

any of the details of what happened with any

of your associates, like Adkins (sic) or

anybody like that?

LOYD JOWERS: No. Willie said I

told him a lot of things, but he is a big old

liar. I ain't told him nothing. I'll tell

him that, too, if I ever see him again.

DEXTER KING: What time did you

come to work on the 4th, April the 4th?

LOYD JOWERS: Four o'clock.

That's the time I came every day unless --

LEWIS GARRISON: Four a.m.?

LOYD JOWERS: No, p.m. You was

talking about in the afternoon, wasn't you?

LEWIS GARRISON: He was talking

about in the morning. What time did you open

in the morning?

LOYD JOWERS: I opened at five.

I thought you meant that afternoon. I

already told you that I was home during the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

607

day.

DEXTER KING: Right. Did you

come in on April 4th in the morning?

LOYD JOWERS: I was in there

that morning, oh, yeah, about four o'clock,

because I opened up at five.

DEXTER KING: What were you

saying about four, that you came in at --

LOYD JOWERS: That afternoon I

come in. See, after I got lunch ready, I

turned it over to my cook, and she handled

the lunch crowd. Then I come back to work

that afternoon at four o'clock.

DEXTER KING: What type of car

were you driving that day?

LOYD JOWERS: I don't know if I

was driving my station wagon or my Cadillac.

It was one or the other. Whichever one my

wife wasn't driving, I was driving the other

one.

DEXTER KING: Did you hear --

were you told that there would be --

actually, I read it -- that there would be

somebody in the organization, in Dr. King's

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

608

organization, that would get him on the

balcony, so to speak, or get him in the

position? Had you been told that?

LOYD JOWERS: To my

recollection, I don't remember anybody

telling me that, I do not. Now, that doesn't

mean they didn't do it. We're talking about

thirty years ago or longer.

DEXTER KING: Had you heard of

anybody on the inside that they had

infiltrateed or penetrated?

LOYD JOWERS: Sure, I heard

that. I sure did, from customers in the

restaurant. I heard plenty of it. How much

of that talk was true, I don't know. Maybe

none of it. I tend not to believe half of

it.

DEXTER KING: What kind of

stuff did you hear?

LOYD JOWERS: Well, I heard that

Jones was involved in it. Then I heard that

the other person I heard was -- it wouldn't

make sense to me, but the guy that took his

place, what's his name?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

609

ANDREW YOUNG: Ralph Abernathy?

LOYD JOWERS: Abernathy, yes. I

heard he had him moved from downstairs to

upstairs. I always doubted that. But

somebody had it done. It had to be someone

in his organization that would do it, I would

think, or his security. I always figured his

security had to have done it.

DEXTER KING: You never heard

anything mentioned about Reverend Kyles or

Reverend Jackson?

LOYD JOWERS: No, sir. I never

did. I never did. I heard a lot of good

about them. I never heard anything bad about

either of those men.

DEXTER KING: Did Liberto ever

mention his ties to Marcellous or -- what was

the guy in Memphis? -- Genovise or Venovise?

LOYD JOWERS: No, not that I can

remember.

DEXTER KING: But it was pretty

common knowledge that he was associated with

the Marcellous organization:

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, yeah. Half

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

610

the police department knew that. Or maybe

more than that.

LEWIS GARRISON: I believe you

are talking about prostitution, gambling and

what else?

LOYD JOWERS: Who you are

talking about?

LEWIS GARRISON: Mr. Liberto.

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, Frank? He

had a little gun-running deal, selling guns

to I guess the Cuban rebels, I guess, or at

least that is what I was told, you know.

LEWIS GARRISON: Gambling,

drugs?

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, yeah.

LEWIS GARRISON: Prostitution?

LOYD JOWERS: I would think that

money I handled for him before the

assassination, that that money was going to

buy drugs, guns, and payoff money. Now, he

had to pay off, I can tell you that.

LEWIS GARRISON: Who did he have

to pay off?

LOYD JOWERS: Well, he had the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

611

police department in New Orleans, the police

department in Memphis. That got him a long

way. I'm not too sure he didn't pay

Mr. Crump some money back years ago. Because

he was one powerful dude in this town, you

can believe that.

DEXTER KING: Were there two

back doors from the building leading to the

brush area, one from the kitchen and the

other one from the rear stairway of the

rooming house?

LOYD JOWERS: Well now, are you

talking about where my restaurant was?

DEXTER KING: Yes, sir.

LOYD JOWERS: Okay. My

restaurant had a front entrance and it had a

back entrance. Okay. The upstairs had a

stairwell that come down the side, but it

stayed blocked off all the time. How they

got around the Fire Department blocking that

off, I do not know, but they did.

You could go down the steps, but you

get to that door and it would not open inside

or out. Of course, they had a front

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

612

entrance, and it went right down beside my

grill, which was inside the building, and it

went right out right next to my door.

My door was like here. Their

entrance was right here, just right around

the corner.

DEXTER KING: Do you know the

name of the people who were staying upstairs

in the rooming house --

LOYD JOWERS: Charlie Stephens.

DEXTER KING: -- on April 4th?

LOYD JOWERS: Charlie Stephens

is the only one I really knew. And the

crippled boy lived there. Damn, his name --

I'll be darn. I knew his name because he was

a customer that come in and bought a lot of

beer.

DEXTER KING: Was Earl Clark up

there or Raul that afternoon?

LOYD JOWERS: Not to my

knowledge. Not to my knowledge.

DEXTER KING: Do you remember

what Clark was wearing that afternoon?

LOYD JOWERS: No, I sure don't.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

613

He wasn't wearing a police uniform. I know

that.

DEXTER KING: I remember you

mentioning a white shirt I thought the last

time.

LOYD JOWERS: Are you talking

about the guy that handed me the gun?

DEXTER KING: Right.

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah, he had a

white shirt on. Sure did.

DEXTER KING: Do you remember

what else he may have had on?

LOYD JOWERS: Dark pants and a

white shirt. Other than that, I cannot tell

you, because it happened so fast, about like

that and he was gone.

DEXTER KING: Are you pretty

comfortable -- I should ask, did you see him

fire the shot, the rifle?

LOYD JOWERS: No, I did not. I

did not. I heard the shot when it went off.

I couldn't miss hearing it. Whether it went

off from upstairs or down in the bushes, I

couldn't miss hearing it. It sounded like a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

614

damn cannon.

DEXTER KING: You say it did go

off upstairs?

LOYD JOWERS: Whichever place it

went off. There wasn't but how many feet up

there, ten, twelve feet. That was right over

my back door. That's where the bathroom is.

My back door is right here, and the bathroom

is about ten, twelve feet above.

DEXTER KING: But if he handed

you the rifle, how could he have been

upstairs?

LOYD JOWERS: He couldn't have

been. Now, how you explain that and the test

shows that that bullet was going down, there

is only one explanation for it, and two or

three different people have said this

happened. Jones said something to him about

getting his overcoat or a coat, and he bent

over the counter -- this is the only

explanation I can come up with. He bent over

the rail. That's when he got shot on the

balcony.

DEXTER KING: From down in the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

615

bushes?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

ANDREW YOUNG: Your place was on

a hill, though.

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

ANDREW YOUNG: So the bushes and

the room were about the same level?

LOYD JOWERS: They were about

the same level. You see, if you shoot a

rifle --

ANDREW YOUNG: He was sort of

like that, leaning over talking.

LOYD JOWERS: He was leaning

over trying to hear what Jones was talking

about. That has to be the only explanation.

It went in long about here.

ANDREW YOUNG: It hit the tip

of his chin.

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, it did? It

did hit his chin? Okay.

ANDREW YOUNG: And then --

LOYD JOWERS: So he had to be

leaning over that railing. Now, if he in

fact was shot from there, from that backyard,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

616

then that's where it had to be. I would say

it would be a pretty good angle from up in

that rooming house. Whether that is the way

it happened, I don't know. That's the only

explanation I have for it.

LEWIS GARRISON: Was the door to

the basement open that afternoon?

LOYD JOWERS: I never locked

it. There wasn't nothing down there. I

figured there was no reason to lock it.

There sure wasn't.

DEXTER KING: Do you know

whether Clark or anybody went down there

after the shooting?

LOYD JOWERS: I have no idea.

DEXTER KING: Do you think

Clark put on a uniform or had a uniform after

the shooting?

LOYD JOWERS: I have no idea.

DEXTER KING: But if he had on

a white shirt, would it have been easy for

him to change into other clothes?

LOYD JOWERS: He could change

shirts in a matter of seconds if you didn't

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

617

have it already buttoned up. Sure you

could. He could have changed that when he

got in the car.

DEXTER KING: So you never saw

him anymore after that?

LOYD JOWERS: No.

DEXTER KING: Who was in the

brush area at the time of the shooting?

LOYD JOWERS: I have no idea.

DEXTER KING: So you took the

rifle and just went inside?

LOYD JOWERS: I was already

inside. He handed me the rifle through the

back door.

DEXTER KING: He just came into

the back door or to the back door?

LOYD JOWERS: He was about from

here to Junior there. He didn't have to hand

me the rifle. He threw it to me. He threw

it to me like you would do a soldier. Of

course, I caught it. It had just been

fired. I heard it when it went off. I done

what Frank told me to, I broke it down and

put it under the counter and went on and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

618

waited on my customers.

DEXTER KING: Did you see

anybody driving the Mustang that afternoon, a

white Mustang?

LOYD JOWERS: I did not. I know

there was one parked in my parking place when

I got to work at four o'clock. I pulled

right up behind him like that.

DEXTER KING: That was on South

Main?

LOYD JOWERS: On South Main. I

did notice it had out-of-state tags, but I

don't know what state it was. I knew it

wasn't local. I figured it was shoppers over

across the street over there shopping.

That's what I figured. I got as far away

from that sparkplug (sic) as I could and got

on out and went to work.

DEXTER KING: In your opinion,

and I know it is just an opinion, do you

think Earl Clark was the trigger man?

LOYD JOWERS: Now, you know, I

have an opinion of that. Now, my personal

opinion, I think he was. I sure do.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

619

DEXTER KING: Why do you --

aside from him throwing you a rifle, was

there any conversation you all had beforehand

or any talk you had heard about did he have a

reason to or was it just money? Why would he

have done it? What was his motive, I guess?

LOYD JOWERS: I would think

probably for money. That's what I would

think. That's what I believed at the time.

ANDREW YOUNG: Somebody -- was

there any evidence that he lived a little

better after the shooting?

LOYD JOWERS: I really don't

know, Mr. Young.

ANDREW YOUNG: You didn't see

him anymore?

LOYD JOWERS: If I ever seen

that man any more up until -- he is dead,

isn't he?

LEWIS GARRISON: I think he has

died.

LOYD JOWERS: I don't remember.

I don't think I ever seen him anymore.

LEWIS GARRISON: Even though you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

620

had been a close friend and had been hunting

companions?

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, yeah, we had

been friends for years.

DEXTER KING: What about do you

recall which police officers interviewed you

after the shooting?

LOYD JOWERS: I have no idea.

They really didn't do any interviewing that

night. They took down a name and address and

telephone number and told us to go home when

they got all the information, name, address

and telephone number. That's all I give them

that night.

DEXTER KING: Who conducted the

crime scene I guess interrogation? Was it

FBI or the Memphis police?

LOYD JOWERS: I have no idea.

DEXTER KING: What about the

people, Barger -- is it Barger or Barjer?

LOYD JOWERS: Barger,

B A R G E R.

DEXTER KING: Zachery,

McCullough, Clark, Liberto, did you see any

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

621

of those people after the killing?

LOYD JOWERS: You mean that

night?

DEXTER KING: Right.

LOYD JOWERS: Or the next day?

No, sir.

DEXTER KING: Or even the next

day. I know you talked to Liberto.

LOYD JOWERS: I talked to

Liberto. I didn't see him. I didn't see

none of them the next day. I sure didn't.

DEXTER KING: How many times

did you meet McCullough?

LOYD JOWERS: As far as actually

meeting him, like you telling me his your

name is McCullough and me telling him my

name, I don't think I ever did. I did know

him. I knew him when I seen him and still

would, I think, even though it has been

thirty years.

DEXTER KING: How deep do you

think he was involved in the killing?

LOYD JOWERS: I don't really --

really and truly? I think he was just

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

622

following orders. That's exactly what I

think. I always believed that. I believed

he was just doing what he was supposed to be

doing.

DEXTER KING: How many planning

sessions did you see him attend?

LOYD JOWERS: How many what?

DEXTER KING: How many planning

sessions did you see him attend?

LOYD JOWERS: Just that one time

when he come in the grill. I had no idea

what they were talking about. I got a word

here or there. I knew it was illegal,

whatever it was. It wasn't unusual.

DEXTER KING: And Barger

brought him in?

LOYD JOWERS: I didn't say --

DEXTER KING: Did he work for

Barger?

LOYD JOWERS: See, Barger was a

field inspector.

DEXTER KING: What does that

mean? He was over the uniformed division?

LOYD JOWERS: He was over a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

623

section of the uniformed. They had four

field inspectors. I don't know how many

policemen worked on each section. If I had

to guess, I'd say about a hundred, maybe a

hundred twenty-five.

Of course, they had the city split

up. Each one of them had -- I believe they

call them assistant chiefs now, but they were

field inspectors back then.

DEXTER KING: How much money

was Clark paid?

LOYD JOWERS: I have no idea. I

don't have the slightest idea.

DEXTER KING: What do you -- who

do you think paid him, then?

LOYD JOWERS: The man who said

his name was Raul. He is the one I gave the

money to. He had to be the one who paid him.

DEXTER KING: Do you think that

Raul approached Clark about being the

trigger man?

LOYD JOWERS: I don't know. I

wouldn't doubt it, but I don't know.

DEXTER KING: Do you know of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

624

any other Memphis police officers that would

have received money for the operation?

LOYD JOWERS: No, I do not. I

don't know that Clark got any money out of

it. I just know I believe he did. But as

far as I seen him getting any, he may have

done it for the fun of it. I don't know.

You never know about people.

DEXTER KING: Did you ever hear

anything about this hoax radio broadcast, you

know, that this broadcast was put out over

the police radio that the suspect was

traveling in one direction?

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, yeah, I heard

about that. He was supposed to have been out

in Raleigh or somewhere like that, a white

Mustang, the police were supposed to have

been behind him, and James Earl Ray said he

was going the other direction going down 65.

DEXTER KING: Going north?

Going north or south.

LEWIS GARRISON: South.

DEXTER KING: South, rather.

But the radio said he was going north?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

625

LOYD JOWERS: Going north, yeah.

DEXTER KING: Now, it has been

said the only people who would have had the

technology to break into police radio

frequency would have been the military.

LOYD JOWERS: They are wrong

about that. I had a scanner that picked

up -- I think they had four channels. I had

a scanner that picked up all four of those

channels.

DEXTER KING: No, no, not pick

up but to actually break in and broadcast.

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, yeah, to

break in and talk on it, that would be the

military.

DEXTER KING: In fact, that

came out in the House Select when they did

their investigation.

LOYD JOWERS: I misunderstood

you.

DEXTER KING: Sure.

LOYD JOWERS: I thought you

said --

DEXTER KING: To listen. You

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

626

can monitor. But to actually break in and

broadcast.

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

DEXTER KING: What about the

taxi driver that picked up the passenger at

the time of the killing and said they saw a

man who came down over the wall and get into

a Memphis police car up on I think Huling?

Is it Huling Street?

LOYD JOWERS: Huling, yeah.

DEXTER KING: And the driver

was killed that night.

LEWIS GARRISON: I don't think

he knows anything about that. What happened

with that was after this Prime Time telecast,

there was a gentleman that called me and gave

his name to Dr. Pepper, like he states in his

book.

The statement he made was that he

was a cab driver that night and that a friend

of his was also a cab driver and that this

friend was over at the Lorraine Motel and

radioed him and said I just saw -- well, he

said he was unloading some luggage and that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

627

he was looking up and recognized Dr. King,

and he said -- he radioed to his friend that

"I just saw Dr. King was shot."

He said he called his dispatcher,

and he told him to go ahead and get out of

the area. So the gentleman called me who is

still living in Memphis and said that he told

his friend to meet him out at the airport at

a place they frequent out there.

He said two officers came out

there. He heard his friend give the police

officer an account of what he had saw. He

had seen just what you said, someone who ran

and got in a police car.

Then he'll tell you this today -- he

has talked to several people. But at any

rate, he said the police officer said, okay,

come down in the morning to the station and

give us a full statement. So the next

morning they found the man's body across the

bridge on the Arkansas side and they said he

had been thrown out of a car.

LOYD JOWERS: I remember that

cab driver getting killed. I didn't know

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

628

about all that.

LEWIS GARRISON: But there is no

account of it. You can't find a thing about

this. But this man will tell you that

today. I gave his name to Dr. Pepper.

ANDREW YOUNG: Do you remember

his name?

LEWIS GARRISON: No, sir, I

don't have it here with me right now.

DEXTER KING: This is actually

in Pepper's book, the name of the fellow?

LEWIS GARRISON: Yes. He gave

Dr. Pepper his name.

LOYD JOWERS: I didn't know

anything about it.

LEWIS GARRISON: I've had

someone interview him before Dr. Pepper did.

That's exactly what happened. Louis Ward, I

believe it is something like that.

DEXTER KING: You believe they

just got rid of the file?

LEWIS GARRISON: I think there

is no question. After we began to dig into

it, we could find no record where the man was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

629

even killed. I believe his name is

Mr. Ward. He will tell you today that's what

happened.

He said he heard the man at the

airport tell the two police officers that he

had seen Dr. King -- he was unloading

luggage, looked up and saw Dr. King over the

railing, and he said he saw him -- it looked

to him like it blowed his whole face off. He

looked around immediately and saw a man

running and get into a police car.

Then he radioed his dispatcher. Of

course, he said they were close friends.

This man said he was out in East Memphis. He

said, well, let's meet at the airport and

we'll talk about it. He said two police

officers came out there and interviewed the

man.

He said, I heard him give the

statement, tell the police exactly what he

had seen. They said to come in in the

morning and give a full statement at the

police station. But then he was found dead

on the Arkansas side. The story was someone

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

630

threw him out of a car.

But we can't find even a trace of

it. In fact, the cab company claims they

can't find a company record that he even

worked there. We went so far to check with

the cab company. They couldn't find

anything. They won't admit it.

DEXTER KING: What did you hear

was learned about any prior knowledge about

the killing or involvement of anybody with a

public or private person in Memphis or

elsewhere or any state officials or federal

officials?

LOYD JOWERS: Any knowledge I

had prior to the assassination?

DEXTER KING: Uh-huh. Or even

after.

LOYD JOWERS: I heard everything

in the world I guess after. But I didn't put

much stock in it. Most of it was just beer

talk, you know.

DEXTER KING: Anything before?

LOYD JOWERS: Never heard a

thing before.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

631

DEXTER KING: You mentioned

Solomon Jones. But you heard that after.

That is beer talk, is that what you mean when

you you said beer talk, the thing you said

about Solomon Jones?

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, yeah, I heard

that afterwards, that he was talking to Dr.

King up on the balcony. If he in fact was

shot from my backyard, Dr. King would had to

have been leaning over that balcony. He

would have had to have been. Otherwise that

bullet could have gone up. I mean, it was

that or it would have gone level.

ANDREW YOUNG: It could have

gone either way. It really -- you can't tell

which way it went because it was such a clean

wound that --

LOYD JOWERS: Didn't it hit a

bone in his --

ANDREW YOUNG: A bone in his

spinal cord. I don't think it hit anything

in his shoulder.

LOYD JOWERS: I thought it hit

his collar bone.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

632

LEWIS GARRISON: I don't think

so.

ANDREW YOUNG: The collar bone

is up here.

LOYD JOWERS: That's what I'm

talking about. It was like from here to here

just blown away.

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

DEXTER KING: Now, Mr. Jowers,

when we met the last time, it was clear that

we felt we needed to meet again to really

get --

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, yeah.

DEXTER KING: -- get more

detail. I'm trying to remember, and I'm

going off the top of my head, what you had

stated today that you haven't already stated,

and I can't really seem to pinpoint anything

much different than what you already said

then.

I wanted to just ask for your -- if

you could help me here, because I'm trying to

recall was there something that I missed the

last time that you stated today that you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

633

didn't state before.

LOYD JOWERS: The only

difference is that I'm almost positive it was

Clark in my back door, and I'm not sure about

the rifle. But I'll tell you what I

thought. I thought it was a 30-30. It could

have been a 30-06, as well as it could have

been a 30-30.

Now, when the shot went off, it

sounded like a 30-30, because they are a lot

louder than a 30-06 when they are fired.

That is two things. The other -- I told you

something else that I didn't tell you

before. I don't know what it was. It is on

that tape, of course.

DEXTER KING: Well, is there

anything you want to tell me that I haven't

asked that you think might be helpful?

LOYD JOWERS: I can't think of a

thing, Dexter. Now, I've told you up to now

everything I know about it.

DEXTER KING: What have you --

or from your opinion or what you have heard,

rumors included, at what level of government

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

634

or involvement do you think this

assassination was carried out by plan?

LOYD JOWERS: What you want to

know is where the order come from?

DEXTER KING: Right.

LOYD JOWERS: It is my opinion

and my belief that the order come from J.

Edgar Hoover. Now, that's where the order

come from.

How to prove that, there is no way.

I could just easily said the President, but I

know better than that, because I don't

believe the president would have done that.

But now J. Edgar Hoover hated your dad.

DEXTER KING: How could -- if

military were involved, wouldn't the

Commander in Chief by just from you being in

the service and knowing --

LOYD JOWERS: Well now, wait a

minute now. The CIA or FBI are not

military. No.

DEXTER KING: No, I'm

saying --

LOYD JOWERS: You mean if the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

635

military was involved?

DEXTER KING: Right.

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah. Not only

that, but there would be a record of it.

DEXTER KING: And wouldn't the

Commander in Chief have to give the order if

they were involved in something like that?

LOYD JOWERS: Some word between

the guy that was doing the assassination and

the President, somebody in between there

would give the order. But first it would

have to come from the head honcho.

ANDREW YOUNG: Hoover had a man

who was his number two man who was almost

staying in the White House, Lee DeLoach. He

was the one that was keeping -- that was sort

of telling Lyndon Johnson what they wanted

him to know.

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

DEXTER KING: Let me also ask

you is there anyone that you know of that can

present scientific evidence about this case,

anything that occurred that you know of,

somebody who is still living that would

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

636

have -- that would be able to say not only

did I see this, here is evidence, a rifle or,

you know, anything concrete?

LOYD JOWERS: To my knowledge, I

don't know of anyone that has scientific

evidence of which rifle did actually kill

him. I definitely don't believe it was the

one the police found. I'll never believe

that in a million years.

ANDREW YOUNG: Where did they

find that?

LOYD JOWERS: Right in front

of -- see, this was the street here and the

sidewalk. My building was right here.

You've got the rooming house, two doors here,

two rooming house doors, then you've got an

amusement company over here. His front door

sits back I guess it must be ten feet.

That's where the rifle was found.

DEXTER KING: So it is your

feeling that James Earl Ray did not --

LOYD JOWERS: No. He didn't no

more kill him than you killed your own dad.

No. No. Nope. I'd never believe that in a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

637

million -- even if he told me I wouldn't

believe it.

DEXTER KING: So why was he set

up?

LOYD JOWERS: His own fault.

They got him out of jail. They furnished him

money. They furnished him passports. Now,

they come up with that tale about him setting

up a gun deal, but that wasn't true. They

may have told him that, you know.

But now he stalked your father

halfway across the United States, went to

Atlanta, had all that written down. Now, he

was doing that for the CIA and the Mafia.

That's exactly why he was doing that.

DEXTER KING: What if they told

him to go to these places so they could

establish a paper trail with established

documentation? If they were in fact using

him as a set-up person, wouldn't they want

him to appear that he was stalking him?

LOYD JOWERS: Why, certainly

they would. Sure they would.

DEXTER KING: So is it possible

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

638

that he was doing things that appeared to be

stalking but maybe he didn't realize it?

LOYD JOWERS: He probably didn't

even realize it, yeah. Yeah. I'm sure

that's the way it went down. I'm sure.

Because if he wasn't going to -- if he had no

intention of hurting Dr. King, which I don't

believe he did, why would he want to be

stalking him?

He was doing what he was told to

do. That was to make it look like that he

was stalking Dr. King, whether he was or

not.

DEXTER KING: Well, I think I

have asked --

ANDREW YOUNG: Do you mind me

taking a picture of this?

LOYD JOWERS: No, no. We'll

make you a tape of that, if you want to.

Help yourself. Go right ahead.

ANDREW YOUNG: Why don't you

lean toward --

LOYD JOWERS: Can you see all of

us?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

639

ANDREW YOUNG: Yeah, I can.

LOYD JOWERS: Do you want me

to -- do you want to take some pictures for

your family?

DEXTER KING: Sure.

LOYD JOWERS: Do you want me to

smile or not? Okay, I was just kidding.

DEXTER KING: Do you want me to

snap you?

LOYD JOWERS: Well, Dexter, I

wish I knew exactly who done the killing, but

I don't. If I did, believe me, I'd say it.

But I do know this for sure: It was a

for-sure conspiracy.

LEWIS GARRISON: Well,

Mr. Jowers, isn't it true that Mr. Young and

Mr. King --

LOYD JOWERS: Lewis, I can't

hear you.

LEWIS GARRISON: Isn't it really

true that Mr. -- that lieutenant Clark did

it? You know that, don't you?

LOYD JOWERS: I'm almost

positive. But as far as seeing his face, I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

640

did not.

LEWIS GARRISON: But he had on

the clothes and all that you had seen him in

earlier?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah, I had seen

him in the same clothes. But as far as me

seeing his face, I did not. Now, I saw the

back of his head.

ANDREW YOUNG: The people who

were involved in this as far as you know that

are still alive would be --

LEWIS GARRISON: Lieutenant

Zachery.

LOYD JOWERS: Zachery is still

alive.

LEWIS GARRISON: McCullough.

McCullough is still alive.

LOYD JOWERS: McCullough.

LEWIS GARRISON: Who else? Of

course, Mr. Jowers. Ms. Spates in front of

Mr. Jowers -- he knows because he was

there -- she says what he saw.

LOYD JOWERS: That was a big old

lie.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

641

LEWIS GARRISON: You know she

described it in lengthy statements under oath

that she saw this.

LOYD JOWERS: Oh, yeah, sure.

LEWIS GARRISON: You heard that

under oath, heard her say that?

LOYD JOWERS: Sure, I was right

there.

LEWIS GARRISON: She had given

the deposition. She gave affidavit after

affidavit and described what she saw. You

know, that don't you?

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

DEXTER KING: That's what I

don't understand. How would she -- why would

she go to that extent?

LOYD JOWERS: To get at me.

DEXTER KING: What?

LOYD JOWERS: That's why. No

other reason. She is really and truly -- she

is serious about that, too. There is not a

dad-gum word of it that is true, but she

believes it, and there is nobody that can

change her mind, that I actually done the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

642

shooting.

DEXTER KING: Oh, she thinks

you did the shooting?

LOYD JOWERS: Damn right she

said it. I don't know if she said it in the

deposition or not, but she told me that.

DEXTER KING: Now, how many

times did you see Clark that day in your

grill?

LOYD JOWERS: One time.

DEXTER KING: That was in the

morning?

LOYD JOWERS: That don't mean he

wasn't in there more than that. See, I left

about ten, somewhere around ten.

DEXTER KING: You said

Ms. Spates used to be your girlfriend?

LOYD JOWERS: Yes, sir.

ANDREW YOUNG: Hell hath no

fury like a woman scorned.

LOYD JOWERS: And, buddy, she

got one hell of a temper, too.

LEWIS GARRISON: She has two

children and says he is the father.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

643

LOYD JOWERS: I offered to go

with her to take a blood test. Then we'll

find out if I am or not. She backed out.

Right on up to the time to go, then she

backed out. She knew damn well I wasn't the

father of those children. If I had been, I

would have been supporting them.

LEWIS GARRISON: Mr. Jowers,

under oath, though, you said you were engaged

in a sexual relationship with her?

LOYD JOWERS: Well, hell, yeah,

for some period of time.

LEWIS GARRISON: That went on

for a year or two?

LOYD JOWERS: It was longer than

that, more like five years.

LEWIS GARRISON: I several

years?

LOYD JOWERS: Like I say about

the President, a man is allowed to do any

damn thing, you know, especially a lounge

man.

LEWIS GARRISON: Why don't you

step outside a moment and let me talk to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

644

them.

LOYD JOWERS: Okay.

ANDREW YOUNG: We really

appreciate your seeing us, your coming

forward.

LOYD JOWERS: I hate I'm not any

more help now. If there is anything I can

do, you can believe I'll do it.

DEXTER KING: You said if you

thought it would help, you would come

forward --

LOYD JOWERS: Yeah.

DEXTER KING: -- to the media?

Don't you think it would cause people to

start --

LOYD JOWERS: I think it would

get me put in jail. I think it would get me

indicted. That's exactly what I think. I

could be wrong, but I don't think so.

DEXTER KING: Okay.

ANDREW YOUNG: Thank you very

much.

LOYD JOWERS: See you later.

ANDREW YOUNG: Okay."

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

645

(This is the end of the tape

proceedings played in the court room.)

THE COURT: All right, ladies

and gentlemen. This is a good time for us to

break for lunch.

(Jury out.)

(Lunch recess.)

THE COURT: All right. Bring

the jury out, please, sir.

(Jury in).

THE COURT: All right, Mr.

Pepper. You may proceed.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiffs call His Honor Judge Arthur

Haynes.

ARTHUR J. HAYNES, JR.

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Judge Haynes.

A. Good afternoon, sir.

Q. Thank you very much for joining us

here this afternoon: Would you state for the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

646

record, your full name and address.

A. Arthur Jackson Haynes, Jr., 3533

Spring Valley Terrace, Birmingham, Alabama.

Q. And what is your present occupation?

A. I'm a circuit judge, Tenth Judicial

Circuit, Birmingham, Alabama.

Q. How long have you been a circuit

court judge?

A. Fifteen years.

Q. And before you were a circuit court

judge, what did you do?

A. I was a lawyer, a courtroom lawyer.

Q. You were a trial lawyer?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Was there a time in 1968 that you

were asked to become involved in the case of

the assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr.?

A. I was.

Q. And what was the position that you

undertook at that time?

A. Well, simple arithmetic will tell you

I was a very young lawyer at the time. James

Earl Ray contacted my father, who was also a

trial lawyer. We had had some success in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

647

defending highly-publicized difficult,

unpopular cases.

When James Earl Ray was arrested in

London and contacted us, asked us to

undertake his representation. Actually, we

were contacted by R. J. Sneyed, which was the

name he was traveling under on a Canadian

passport. We went to London.

Q. You and your father then became

defense lawyers for James Earl Ray?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. You were his first defense lawyers.

Is that right?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And did you undertake the trial

preparation of that case?

A. Absolutely.

Q. And were you ready to go to trial?

A. Yes, sir. Absolutely. He changed

lawyers the night before I was going to give

the opening statement in the case.

Q. You were prepared to go to trial

right up to the night before the trial date

and then what happened?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

648

A. I left James Earl Ray on Friday. I

spent all day with him here in Memphis on

Friday getting ready for trial. I returned

to Birmingham late Friday evening and came

back on Sunday night. I had to get new

suits, do some final things to get ready for

trial. When we arrived, we were handed a

note saying that when changed lawyers.

Q. Were you able to eventually learn

what happened and why he made that change of

counsel at the midnight hour?

A. I never did know for sure, Mr.

Pepper. That remains a mystery to me. I

know that he contacted us approximately one

week later and said, gentlemen, I made the

biggest mistake I ever made, would you please

come back to try this case for me, all this

new fellow wanted me to do is plead guilty.

Q. It was too late by then?

A. Yes, sir. The case was so bolloxed

up that we just weren't willing to get back

involved in it.

Q. Judge Haynes, since you took that

case up to the eve of trial and diligently

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

649

prepared the trial, you were very familiar

with the evidence that the State had?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. We're going to talk about a

particular aspect of that evidence here this

afternoon, but in general what is your view,

what can you tell us now in terms of how you

saw the case?

A. In 1968 on the eve of trial the State

was absolutely confined to a theory of one

man: James Earl Ray, acting alone, killed

Dr. King. Our view of it was that the

evidence and testimony was inescapable that

that was an impossible result both factually

and it was an impossible result at the

trial. We were absolutely confident that the

case would be won.

Q. Were you and your father not in fact

asked to take a plea bargain to James Earl

Ray offered by the State early on because

they didn't want to try this case?

A. I don't know what they wanted to do,

but, yes, we had a plea bargain offered

earlier and took it to James Earl Ray.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

650

Q. What were were the terms of that plea

bargain, do you recall?

A. I've forgot exactly what they were,

Mr. Pepper. Whatever the plea was, the plea

we were offered allowed for parole in ten

years. I believe he took a ninety-nine year

sentence, which at that time made him

eligible for parole in thirty-three years.

And we were offered a sentence that allowed

for parole in ten years. Of course, parole

wasn't a likelihood in that case, anyway.

The offer was better than the one we had, at

least theoretically.

Q. What was James Earl Ray's response to

that offer?

A. It was preposterous. Neither he nor

we were going to consider a plea of guilty in

a case that should have been won. Obviously

we would have considered a reasonable plea,

but I think the circumstances were such that

a lesser plea simply was not something that

the prosecutors were putting forward.

Q. Okay. Moving on, you and your father

and your team of investigators obviously

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

651

interviewed a good number of witnesses.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you do some of this interviewing

yourself personally?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. And did you at one time or another

interview a man called Canipe, who owned a

store on South Main Street?

A. Sure. Canipe Amusement Company, yes,

sir. We interviewed Mr. Canipe.

Q. So that we can set the location of

that, Judge, if I can bring you back to an

area which I'm sure you haven't thought about

in many years, but --

A. I recognize it vividly.

Q. This, you see, is a depiction of the

rooming house --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- which it had two wings?

A. Right.

Q. And underneath one wing do you see

roughly where Canipe's store would have been?

A. Put your pointer right back where it

was. I believe there was a doorway to the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

652

rooming house there and then to the right

there was an angle doorway. If you would cut

off that corner roughly there was an angled

entranceway to the Canipe Amusement Company.

It would be in the lower right-hand portion

of that building where you are pointing,

right about where your pointer is.

Q. That's where Canipe's Amusement

Parlor was located?

A. Yes.

Q. Now let's put up a couple of

photographs. Does that look familiar?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. This is the amusement company you are

speaking about?

A. Right. That's the angled

entranceway.

Q. That's the angled entrance here?

A. Yes.

Q. This is the entrance -- one of the

entrances to the rooming house.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. The other entrance is right over here

between the two wings of the rooming house.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

653

Q. There was a -- on the second floor --

I never went out that entrance, but there was

a crosswalk used by anyone that went in that

entrance there. There was another entrance

there or around the back, one, I forget

which.

Q. Right. Now, what was the State's

contention with respect to evidence that was

found in this area?

A. The State's theory was there was a

Browning box, a Browning rifle box, that

contained some items of clothing, a radio

that had James Earl Ray's Missouri state

penitentiary number on it and a Remmington

760 rifle that James Earl Ray had bought in

Birmingham. That box was -- I believe the

rifle itself was wrapped in clothing. I'm

not totally sure of that. The box itself was

wrapped and tied in some fashion.

The State's theory was that James

Earl Ray had fired the shot that killed Dr.

King, had run across the entranceway there in

that slant between the two buildings.

Adjoining these two buildings was sort of a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

654

rickety metal connecting-way. The State's

theory this was James Earl Ray had fired the

shot from the bathroom on that second floor,

come down that hallway into his room and

carefully packed that box, tied it up, then

had proceeded across the walkway the length

of the building to the back where that stair

from that door came up, had come down the

stairs out the door, placed the Browning box

containing the rifle and the radio there in

the Canipe entryway.

That was the State's theory. It was

the only theory that they could have with

James Earl Ray acting alone in order to prove

their theory.

Q. Then he proceeded to get into a

Mustang and drive away?

A. That's right.

Q. The Mustang was supposedly parked

somewhere around here.

Would you put on the second

photograph. Now, that's a closer view of the

angled doorway. Where did they say this

evidence box was --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

655

A. I've never seen that picture,

Mr. Pepper. I believe the evidence box was

to the right sort of up against that brick

wall to the right, I believe.

Q. Right here?

A. Yes.

Q. We're talking about thirty-one,

thirty-two years ago. I believe that's where

it was. Mr. Canipe, who owned that amusement

company, was on the scene at the time of the

killing. Is that right?

A. That's what they told me, yes, sir.

Q. Did you have an opportunity to

interview him?

A. Yes.

Q. How long after the actual event do

you recall that you interviewed him?

A. How long after the event was it when

we interviewed him?

Q. Yes.

A. Dr. King was killed April the 4th.

James Earl Ray was arrested in June. He

contacted us immediately. We started

investigating it immediately, even before we

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

656

went to London. I would say it was in the

August range, July, August of 1968.

Q. The summer of 1968?

A. I'd say so, yes, sir.

Q. That was at a time when the events

would have been fresh in the mind of Mr.

Canipe?

A. Of course, I don't know what was --

here I am being a judge. I'm sustaining the

objection. I don't know what was in his

mind, but it should have been fresh. It was

immediate.

Q. When you spoke with him, did he

appear to be aware of --

A. Absolutely, sure. He remembered it

very vividly. In fact, we turned over that

entire area, as you can, imagine looking for

not only witnesses but also to exclude people

who later may or may not have knowledge about

it.

He was one of the more reliable

people truthfully that we found down there.

Those in Dr. King's party, they were not

aware of what was happening, as they were on

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

657

the other side of the street.

Q. What did he tell you -- precisely

what did he tell you about what he recalled

about the dropping of that evidence?

A. He said that the package was dropped

in his doorway by a man who dropped it in his

doorway and headed down South Main Street,

headed south down Main Street on foot, and

that this happened at about ten minutes

before the shot was fired. He was tied up

doing something but saw it happen and didn't

go out to check what it was.

Q. He told you that this bundle of

evidence was dropped in his doorway about ten

minutes before the shot was actually fired?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. What did you think of that?

A. We thought it was terrific evidence.

Furthermore, it was very credible, because

right next to that was a fire station, and

the fire station was packed with Memphis

Tactical Squad detectives, firemen, curiosity

seekers, people who were security for Dr.

King and also surveilling him. The fire

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

658

station was packed with people looking out

the back.

Of course, when they saw Dr. King go

down, the fire station erupted like a

beehive, and they poured out down the

driveway out the door coming looking both in

the bushes, where most of them thought the

shot was fired, and also on down on Main

Street.

So to us it is circumstantial. In

addition to the time involved, it was

circumstantially almost impossible to believe

that somebody had been able to throw that

down and leave right in the face of that

erupting fire station.

Not only was Mr. Canipe a credible

witness, but what he said was very credible

taking into account all the circumstances.

We were very very impressed with his

testimony.

Q. Judge Haynes, at this point in the

plaintiffs' case we're dealing with the

rifle, the rifle in evidence.

A. Yes, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

659

Q. And the death slug. Was the rifle

that was found in that box the weapon that

the State contended was the murder weapon?

A. It was. It was the only weapon

found.

Q. Were you familiar at that time with

any ballistics testing of that weapon?

A. Yes, sir, from the FBI lab. Of

course, they took it to Washington and

performed ballistics tests.

Q. What were the results of that testing

that was done at the time?

A. I believe the phraseology used in the

report was that the evidence slug, that is,

the slug taken from Dr. King's body, and the

rifle, that the evidence slug was consistent

with the type of slug fired by that rifle.

In essence, the best they could do was that

Dr. King was killed by a 30-06 rifle and that

this was a 30-06 rifle.

Q. That's all they could say. Could

they match the bullet, the death slug itself,

to that rifle?

A. We didn't think they had a chance in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

660

the world of matching it. As the FBI -- if

there is a match, if they can make a match

out of a little piece of a slug the size of

your little fingernail, if they did, the

testimony would be that the evidence weapon

to the exclusion of all other weapons in the

world fired the evidence slug. No, sir, they

could not do that.

Q. But is there any doubt in your mind

that if they could have matched that death

slug they took from Dr. King's body to that

rifle in evidence, that they would have done

so?

A. There is no doubt about that. They

would have prized that testimony. That would

be crucial testimony. Then you wouldn't have

to rely on any of the vagaries of eyewitness

testimony. Sure, that would be very

important testimony. Well, we thought it was

important.

Q. Now, did there come a time in the

course of your investigation when you

actually yourself saw, held, examined

personally the death slug?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

661

A. Yes, sir. I held the slug that

killed Dr. King in my hand.

Q. Had you seen other death shrugs and

other bullets at that point in your career?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. What was your view with respect to

that particular slug that you examined at the

time?

A. To the naked eye, it was as good an

evidence slug as you can have. It was a

Remmington core lot bullet and it had a metal

base to the slug. The metal base wasn't

skewed. It was almost perfectly round. See

could the lands and grooves, the marks on the

slug with your naked eye. Visually it was an

excellent evidence slug.

Q. As you looked at it, did you think

that it could be matched easily if it was in

fact the death slug?

A. It was a very small room I guess this

courtroom, certainly the criminal courthouse,

and when I saw that slug, I knew right then

if the James Earl Ray fired that slug, we

were going to see every expert that you can

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

662

imagine in the whole world to put that slug

with that rifle. It just didn't pan out that

way.

Q. Judge Haynes, as a result of your

intensive trial preparation and analysis of

the State's case right up to that November

date, how did you believe that a sitting jury

at that time analyzing that evidence and

weighing that charge would have voted?

A. Well, of course, all a trial lawyer

can do is the best he can in assessing what a

jury is going to do. I have considered in my

thirty-five-year career a jury is the best

lie detector there is. But we felt like the

jury would, if it would follow the law and

the evidence, that on the evidence available

and the law in the case, there was virtually

no chance that the State could prove beyond a

reasonable doubt that James Earl Ray could

have acted alone in firing the shot that

killed Dr. King.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further.

Thank you.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

663

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Judge Haynes, I'm Lewis Garrisoin

representing the Defendant Loyd Jowers. I'm

going to ask you a few questions.

During your interviews with Mr. Ray

and the others you interviewed, did they ever

mention anything going on in James Grill

located here next to the rooming house?

A. Yes, sir. James Earl Ray said at

some point in the afternoon -- he said he had

an accomplice, an associate by the name of

Raul. He said at some point in the

afternoon that one or both of them had gone

into Jim's Grill I think to have a beer. We

interviewed everybody we could lay our hands

on who was in Jim's Grill and could find no

corroboration that they went in there.

Q. Did you ever hear the name Loyd

Jowers mentioned in the investigation?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. In what capacity was he mentioned?

A. Renfro Hayes was an investigator who

worked for us at the time. We had hired

Renfro because, among other things, he knew

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

664

that area of town and a lot of people

involved.

Q. I knew Mr. Hayes well.

A. Then you know what I'm talking

about. Hayes knew Loyd Jowers and at the

time Loyd Jowers was operating Jim's Grill.

Hayes reported back to us that there was

nobody in Jim's Grill that had testimony to

offer that would in any way affect the case.

We had so much ground to cover, we just

excluded that.

Q. Did you ever hear the name Frank

Liberto mentioned by Mr. Ray or anyone during

your investigation?

A. I never heard the name Jowers or

Liberto mentioned by Ray at all. The answer

to that question is no. I think I heard the

Liberto name -- yes, before today I've heard

the name Liberto. I know that Hayes

mentioned it to me maybe in the 1970's but

not contemporaneous with this.

Q. Did you make some effort to locate

this person called Raul?

A. Yes. To some extent. To some

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

665

extent. Bear in mind the question we had on

the table was defending a murder case, not

proving who killed Dr. King. Therefore, our

focus was different than the search for

Raul. But if you want me to go forward to

the extent that we were interested in him --

Q. Yes.

A. -- there was some information about

New Orleans. We thought it was very -- there

was something about it that triggered us as

being very important. In fact, Ray told us

the reason the rifle was in Memphis was that

it was part of an operation to bring guns

from Mississippi down to New Orleans to Cuban

revolutionaries.

We wanted to go to New Orleans. We

thought it was very, very strange that James

Earl Ray refused to allow us to go to New

Orleans. He instructed us that no matter

what happens, to do nothing to investigate

that connection.

To that extent, yeah, we were trying

to trace down -- if nothing else, to -- a

criminal case, as a criminal lawyer, you try

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

666

to make your case on the evidence. You just

cannot rely on what the client tells you. To

some extent we were trying to corroborate

what he had told us, but he wouldn't let us

go.

Q. Judge, did Mr. Ray ever tell you that

he -- let me ask you, first of all, did you

really think there was such a person name

Raul?

A. It was inescapable to us that there

weren't conspirators.

Q. I spent two days taking his testimony

in prison. He never could tell me at any

time that anyone ever saw him with this

person named Raul.

A. Mr. Garrison, we looked and looked

just for that, something that would

corroborate that, to no avail. In fact,

that's why we were interested in the Jim's

Grill people, because that was

contemporaneous. We were looking for

anything, anybody that saw a stranger there

who knew Ray or, ideally, Ray with a

stranger. But nobody there at that time

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

667

would say anything about that.

Q. Did you ever learn at any time that

there was a witness who saw someone in the

brush area? Did anyone ever tell you that,

that they actually saw some person that in

that brush area?

A. If I may reflect on the question you

are asking. The only person that we talked

to who we believe ever knew who fired the

shot was a man in the rooming house. I'll

tell you about him in a minute if you are

interested.

As far as the brushy area is

concerned, there were some associates of Dr.

King who were on the hotel side of the street

who said that they thought the shot came from

there. But that was all regarding that

issue.

MR. GARRISON: Thank you, Judge

Haynes. Nothing further.

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Judge Haynes, I know you said you did

an extensive investigation of potential

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

668

witnesses. Were there any Memphis Police or

Fire Department witnesses the State shared

with you?

A. I know we received none as far as the

police or fire department.

Q. But you uncovered some of these

witnesses yourself?

A. Sure, yes, sir.

Q. Are you familiar with the contention

of the prosecution at that time that the

bullet has fired from the bathroom window of

the rooming house?

A. Yes.

Q. And that it was fired from the

bathroom window, having been rested on a

window sill?

A. I think so.

Q. And that the prosecution claimed that

a dent in that window sill was made by the

rifle itself?

A. I've heard that. I just cannot

believe that they would have actually tried

to prove that in court, though. That's

beyond belief.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

669

Q. Well, would it surprise you to learn

that in fact at the guilty plea hearing on

March 10th, 1969, this contention was put

forth as a matter of certainty that it could

be proven that the dent was caused by the

rifle?

A. I would be shocked if a lawyer said

they could prove that with certainty based

upon what I know of the layout.

Q. Did they turn over to you at any

point in your investigation FBI reports with

respect to laboratory analysis of evidence?

A. No, sir. Of the window sill?

Q. Yes.

A. I don't think so.

Q. It has been entered into these

proceedings as evidence, plaintiffs'

evidence, those reports which indicated that

they could in fact not prove that the window

sill -- that the rifle rested on the window

sill.

A. A report saying that they could not

prove that?

Q. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

670

A. I didn't need a report. I could see

the window sill and the rifle. That just

wasn't an issue.

Q. I'm just wondering if that was

disclosed to you in the course of your

investigation, that report?

A. I don't remember, Mr. Pepper,

specifically. I know this: There were reams

and reams of evidence, much of which, as soon

as we realized what it was, we were on to

something else. We just didn't have time to

chew on every little piece.

The window sill -- you could not

prove that that rifle rested on that window

sill. There is no way. We know that as

lawyers. If we saw a report that said we

can't prove the rifle rested on the window

sill, we would just flip that over and say,

sure, and then move on.

MR. PEPPER: Judge Haynes, thank

you very much.

MR. GARRISON: No questions for

Judge Haynes.

THE COURT: You may stand down.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

671

THE WITNESS: May I be excused?

THE COURT: You may.

(Witness excused.)

MR. PEPPER: The plaintiffs call

Ms. Bobbie Balfour.

BOBBIE BALFOUR

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Ms. Balfour.

A. Good afternoon.

Q. Thank you very much for coming here

this afternoon.

A. Oh, you are welcome.

Q. Would you please state for the record

your full name and address.

A. Bobby King Balfour, 422 (Inaudible.)

Q. Ms. Balfour, are you presently

employed?

A. Yes, I am.

Q. What do you do?

A. I'm a cook.

Q. Where do you work?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

672

A. At Embassy Suites on American Way.

Q. In 1967 and 1968 were you employed at

Jim's Grill on South Main Street in Memphis,

Tennessee?

A. I probably was, sir, but it has been

so long, it is hard to remember what year it

was.

Q. Well, do you remember being employed

in Jim's Grill at the time of the

assassination of Martin Luther King?

A. Oh, yes, I do, uh-huh.

Q. On April 4th, 1968?

A. Right.

Q. And who was your employer at that

time?

A. Loyd Jowers.

Q. Mr. Jowers, Loyd Jowers?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. What were your duties then,

Ms. Balfour, at the time?

A. Waitress and cook, all around. I did

everything.

Q. So you waited on tables and you

cooked and you --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

673

A. Short-order cooked and cooked.

Q. Goodness. How many hours a day did

you work?

A. We came to work in the morning time

when he'd pick us up about four-thirty and

stay there as long as he needed us.

Q. So you started at four-thirty?

A. Yeah. He would pick us up.

Q. He would pick you up and drive you?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. And who else did he pick up?

A. Another lady was named Rosetta.

Q. On April 4th, 1968, did he pick you

and Rosetta up on that day as well?

A. I don't don't think Rosetta came to

work that day, but I did.

Q. Do you think you were picked up by

Mr. Jowers and independently taken to work on

that day?

A. I know I was.

Q. You know you were?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. And you started at the usual time

that morning?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

674

A. Uh-huh.

Q. Now, in the course of your work at

Jim's Grill, were you familiar with a lady

who lived on the second floor just above the

grill in the rooming house named grace

Stephens?

A. Yes. I would take her breakfast.

Q. You used to take her breakfast?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. What time did you take her breakfast

up there as a rule?

A. Between eight-thirty and nine

o'clock, somewhere like that.

Q. Eight-thirty or nine o'clock you

would take her breakfast up?

A. Yeah.

Q. And would you leave the food with her

and then come back downstairs?

A. I would set it beside the bed.

Q. And then would you go and get the

dishes at another time?

A. No.

Q. What happened to the dishes that you

left there?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

675

A. I don't know, but I guess they got

back. I didn't bring them back.

Q. So you didn't bring them back?

A. No.

Q. So you just went up -- you delivered

the breakfast to her?

A. Right.

Q. Why was that? Was she ill?

A. She was in bed all the time.

Q. She was in bed all the time?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. Do you know if she had an illness or

sickness?

A. No, I don't, didn't know what it was.

Q. You didn't know?

A. No.

Q. How long did you have that practice

of going up there and delivering her

food?

A. Oh, just sometimes. I didn't go all

the time because sometimes Rosetta went.

Q. Sometimes Rosetta went?

A. Right.

Q. Was Rosetta working that morning on

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

676

April 4th, as you recall?

A. I don't think so. It has been a long

time. I can't hardly remember, though. I

don't think Rosetta worked that day.

Q. You don't think she did?

A. I don't think she did.

Q. You were there alone?

A. No, I wasn't there alone. He had

another girl there, too.

Q. He had another girl working there?

A. Yes.

Q. Ms. Balfour, did you take breakfast

up to Ms. Grace Stephens that morning?

A. No, I did not.

Q. And why didn't you take breakfast up

to Mrs. Grace Stephens that morning?

A. Mr. Jowers said I didn't have to take

it up there that day.

Q. Mr. Jowers said you didn't have to

take it up there that morning?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. So he told you not to go upstairs

with the breakfast that morning?

A. Right.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

677

Q. Did he explain to you why he did not

want you to go onto the second floor of the

rooming house?

A. No, he did not.

Q. Did you ask him?

A. No.

Q. You just followed him because he was

the boss?

A. Right.

Q. Do you know if Grace Stephens got her

breakfast that day?

A. I don't know.

Q. Ms. Balfour, how long did you work on

that day?

A. Well, I went in that morning, and I

don't know the exact time it was, but just as

I run across the street just in time to catch

the bus, then I made it in the house and it

came on the TV that King had got killed.

Q. So you left Jim's Grill sometime

early prior to the assassination, and by the

time you got home, you heard about it?

A. Right.

Q. Now, did you go to work the next

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

678

morning?

A. Yes, I did. He picked me up.

Q. Mr. Jowers picked you up the next

morning?

A. Right.

Q. And he drove you to work?

A. Right.

Q. In the course of that ride to work

the next morning, do you recall if he

mentioned a rifle to you?

A. No. I remember him saying, you

should have been here last night, we had a

lot of excitement. I asked him what was he

talking about. He said that the police had

come through our place of business and found

a gun.

Q. The police had come through the

restaurant?

A. Right.

Q. And found a gun?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. Where did they say they found the

gun?

A. In the backyard.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

679

Q. In the backyard?

A. In the backyard.

Q. Did you ever look out into that back

area through the back door?

A. I have looked out that back door, but

it was kind of woody out there, a lot of

grass, weeds and stuff out there.

Q. Could you describe that area as you

recall it as you looked onto it?

A. There was a lot of grass out there,

you know, little trees that had grown up back

there. It was in bad shape back there.

Q. Bad shape?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. Mr. Jowers said the police came

through there and they found the gun in that

back area somewhere?

A. Right.

Q. Did he say anything else about the

finding of the gun or about the events of the

night before?

A. Ug-huh.

Q. Nothing more than that?

A. No.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

680

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Ms. Balfour, you had gone to work

that day at the grill about four or five

o'clock in the morning?

A. Right.

Q. Mr. Jowers as usual had come to your

home and gotten you that morning and took you

on to work?

A. That's true.

Q. Let me ask you something. On the day

that this occurred, April the 4th, 1968, that

was a Thursday, had you worked all that week

as you recall?

A. Yeah.

Q. Did you ever see any money in that

restaurant, anyone bring any money?

A. No.

Q. You were there most of the time in

and out of the back?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you ever see a gun?

A. No.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

681

Q. No gun at all?

A. No.

Q. Did you ever hear Mr. Jowers make any

statement before it occurred about the

assassination of Dr. King or Dr. King, any

talk about that at all?

A. No, Jowers wasn't that type person.

Q. He was not prejudiced at all, was he?

A. No, he wasn't.

Q. Very fair, wasn't he?

A. He sure was.

Q. Did you ever see any police officers

in the grill before the assassination of Dr.

King, did any of them come in on a regular

basis?

A. No.

Q. Let me ask you, Ms. Balfour, on the

day of the assassination, what time did you

leave?

A. I don't know what time it was, but it

was kind of late. Because after I made it in

the house, it came on the TV that King had

got killed.

Q. Did you see any new faces that were

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

682

there, any strangers in the grill that day

that you remember?

A. No.

Q. Now, as far as taking the breakfast

to Ms. Stephens, do you know if Mr. Stephens

was paying Mr. Jowers for this?

A. No, I sure don't. Charlie Stephens

paid him all the time.

Q. In fact, that day Mr. Jowers had run

Mr. Stephens out of the restaurant because he

was so drunk he told him to get out of there,

didn't he?

A. Several times.

Q. That had some problems, didn't they?

A. Yeah.

MR. GARRISON: That's all.

THE COURT: Anything further of

this witness?

MR. PEPPER: Just briefly, Your

Honor.

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Mrs. Balfour, were you -- did you

ever give a statement to the police or any

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

683

investigating authority about what you told

this Court today?

A. After King got killed?

Q. Yes.

A. No, they never did ask me.

Q. I'm sorry?

A. No, didn't nobody ever question me at

that time. When they came in that next day,

they asked me a question, but when I gave

them an answer, they told me to go back in

the kitchen.

Q. They told you what?

A. Go back in the kitchen.

Q. Told you to go back in the kitchen?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. They asked you a question, you gave

them an answer, and they told you to go back

in the kitchen?

A. Right.

Q. And no investigating authorities had

ever questioned you about what you saw or

what you heard or anything?

A. No.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you very

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

684

much, Mrs. Balfour.

MR. GARRISON: Let me ask you

one other thing.

RECROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Did anyone from the police, FBI or

Sheriff's Office ever come into the grill

while you were there to look around,

investigate anything after the assassination?

A. No.

MR. GARRISON: That's all.

THE COURT: You may stand down.

(Witness excused.)

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiffs call the clerk of the criminal

court, William key.

WILLIAM R. KEY

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Key. Thank you

very much for coming here this afternoon.

Would you state your full name and address

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

685

for the record, please.

A. William R. Key. I live at 1574

Cherry Park Drive, Memphis, Tennessee, 38120.

Q. Mr. Key, would you tell the Court

what is your present position?

A. I'm the criminal court clerk of

Shelby County.

Q. What are your responsibilities as the

clerk of the criminal court?

A. Basically the clerk of the court is

the keeper of the records. In our case, we

also keep the property and evidence.

Q. And you maintain an evidence room

over in the criminal court clerk's office?

A. That is correct, on the 4th floor.

Q. When you keep property in that

evidence room, what is the nature of the

property that you keep there?

A. Those properties are brought in for

court proceedings, and after that we continue

to hold the property until the case disposed

of, some of it for twenty, twenty-five years.

Q. And has the property in the case

relating to the assassination of Martin

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

686

Luther King been kept in your office or

property room?

A. The property in the case of Martin

Luther King's death is kept in a vault. We

have a large room larger than this room here

where most of the property is kept. However,

in the case of the King killing, it is kept

in a safe that is separate from that where we

keep money and diamonds and things of that

nature.

Q. Would you say that all of the

evidence in that case that is known that has

been turned over is kept in that facility?

A. That is correct. There are thirteen

boxes of it, two hundred sixty-seven items.

Q. It is under your direct supervision?

A. That is true.

Q. Your care and custody?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. That evidence that has been kept in

that vault in terms of its custodial chain,

it has been kept in that vault since 1968?

A. Not in this particular vault. The

criminal court clerk's office was moved

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

687

across to 201 Poplar from 157 Poplar, and

when it was moved there, it was formerly in a

vault in 157, and when we moved into the new

quarters there at 201 Poplar, it was moved

there in 1981.

Q. So it has moved to a different

facility?

A. Yes.

Q. But it has always been under the

supervision, control, care and custody of the

clerk of the criminal court, which includes

your predecessors?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. You are the most recent in a long

line?

A. Five years. I've had it for five

years. Previous to that Mr. Blackwell had

it.

Q. Now, Mr. Key, are you in attendance

here this afternoon under subpoena?

A. Yes, I am.

Q. Have you been asked to bring a piece

of evidence with you to this courtroom?

A. That is correct.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

688

Q. And what is that evidence that you

have brought here to show us?

A. The rifle that is purported to have

been the weapon that slew Dr. King.

Q. This is the evidence rifle in the

case, the assassination of Dr. Martin Luther

King?

A. That is correct.

Q. Is that evidence in this courtroom?

A. Yes, it is.

Q. Where is it?

A. It is over there.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor, if the

evidence may be brought forward.

THE COURT: Go ahead. Test it

to make sure it won't fire.

(Rifle passed to the witness.)

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Now, do you recognize

that as the evidence rifle in the case, the

alleged murder weapon of Dr. Martin Luther

King?

A. Yes, it is. This is the weapon that

we've had since I've been there, and it was

taken to Rhode Island and Pennsylvania for

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

689

firing and testing.

Q. That is the weapon that has been in

the care and custody and has not been

tampered with or exchanged or replaced in any

way?

A. That is correct, since I've been

there. Before I came into that office, I

can't testify to that, but I have some

feeling that it was kept there in the office

that we presently keep it in.

Q. Mr. Key, is that rifle presently, as

far as you are aware, capable of being used?

A. Yes, it is. It still is. We

witnessed it being fired in Pennsylvania and

Rhode Island.

MR. PEPPER: I have nothing

further of this witness.

MR. GARRISON: I have no

questions for Mr. Key. I know Mr. Key well.

I've known you many years. What is it,

forty?

THE WITNESS: A few years.

THE COURT: Let me see it.

(Rifle passed to the Court.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

690

MR. PEPPER: It is a 30-06 760

Gamemaster. Your Honor, we would just like

the jury to have a visit with that weapon, if

it is possible.

THE WITNESS: Let me mention

this. I am under court order that no one

examines it nor holds it.

THE COURT: You may hold it for

their inspection.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further, Your

Honor. Plaintiffs would like the weapon to

remain in the courtroom for the next

witness.

THE COURT: Is the next

testimony concerning this?

MR. PEPPER: The next witness is

on his way, yes.

THE COURT: Would you stay?

THE WITNESS: We will stay

here.

THE COURT: All right.

(Witness excused.)

JOE B. BROWN

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

691

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Judge.

A. Good afternoon, sir. How are you.

Q. If you would state for the record,

please, your full name address.

A. Joseph B. Brown, business address,

201 Poplar.

Q. Thank you. What is is your present

position, sir?

A. I'm a state judge for the 30th

Judicial District, State of Tennessee,

Division IX, Criminal Court of Shelby County.

Q. Are you testifying here this

afternoon voluntarily or under subpoena?

A. Under subpoena.

Q. Thank you again for joining us.

Judge Brown, would you tell the Court some of

your qualifications and professional

training.

A. All right. I have a law degree from

the University of California, Los Angeles,

1973. Came out here -- let's see. I've been

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

692

a member of the bar of the State of Tennessee

since 1975, worked for Legal Services here,

then the Equal Employment Opportunity

Commission.

I was I believe the first black

prosecutor for the City of Memphis and I ran

the City Public Defender's Office for awhile,

then I went into private practice, and in

1990 I was elected judge for Division IX of

the Criminal Courts, August of 1998

re-elected for another term.

Q. Prior to your law career, could you

tell us what was your professional training

and what was your --

A. You mean relative to the subject at

hand?

Q. Relative to the subject at hand.

A. I've always had an intense interest

in the field of ballistics, firearms and such

like. I've been a hunter, target-shooter.

It is sort of a hobby of mine.

At one time in life I thought when I

night go into criminal law it was a decision

I made to get as much into the subject as I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

693

might so I would be able to properly defend

certain defendants.

Q. Over what period of time did you

develop this knowledge and experience with

weapons?

A. Let's see. My father taught me to

shoot when I was six years old. So that

would be going on too close to fifty years

ago.

Q. And had you on your own studied and

read about the science of ballistics and

weapons?

A. I have.

Q. Over what period of time have you

done that?

A. About the last forty years or so.

Q. How long have you handled weapons of

various kinds?

A. Like I said, starting about six or

seven years old.

Q. How long have you handled or had

experience with rifles such as the type

involved in this case?

A. I'd say thirty, thirty-five years

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

694

worth of experience.

Q. And during the course of that

experience, have you explored the nuances of

ballistics and the matching of bullets to

particular weapons?

A. I have, sir.

Q. Are you familiar with the techniques

used in that process?

A. Yes, sir, I am.

Q. Have you familiarized yourself with

the types of weapons and the types of bullets

that go with those weapons, the range of

weapons?

A. I have, sir.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiff would move that Judge Brown be --

Judge Brown's testimony testimony here be

admitted as that of an expert for the purpose

of this discussion.

MR. GARRISON: I certainly agree

and have no objection.

THE COURT: All right. You may

proceed.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Judge Brown, would

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

695

you please initially begin a discussion so

that the Court and the jury can become aware

generally of what the science of ballistics

is about and how it is practiced.

A. Actually what ballistics is about is

the flight of projectiles, in other words, a

projectile that has an initial impetus placed

upon it such as a ballistic missle, where

there is a thrust at the beginning of the

flight of the object, a projectile fired out

of a catapult in Ancient Roman times where

there is a slinging of an object, what

happens once it gets that initial impetus,

closely at hand what happens when you fire a

bullet, projectile, from a rifle or pistol or

such like, how does it behave as it travels

from its point of firing to its target or

until it impacts the ground or, in other

words, stops its forward flight.

Now, in that process there are

certain specified or special categories such

as studying the internal ballistics they call

the subject, that is how does a projectile

behave in the barrel of a weapon, what

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

696

happens when you take one of the

self-contained cartridges that are about

universal today, put that in the appropriate

weapon, pull the trigger and fire it, what

happens. Those are called internal

ballistics. That is called internal

ballistics.

One of the things that is common

today is to take a projectile, a bullet, if

you would, that has been found in the body of

the victim of a homicide or a wounding and

attempt to compare that bullet with the known

sample fired from the suspect weapon. What

commonly happens is the bullet is placed in a

device that amounts to a microscope where the

examiner can carefully move the suspect

bullet around and then take the known sample

and attempt to compare it using striations,

which are fine grooves that are engraved on

the bullet based on the particular

characteristics of the weapon.

There are basal or base

characteristics that are determined by the

nature of the weapon, what caliber it is, who

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

697

the manufacturer is, and then there are

individual characteristics of weapons that

are brought about by manufacturing flaws.

Nothing is perfect, and everything

that is manufactured basically is going to

leave some tool marks in the bore of the

weapon. The idea is to see if you can

compare the individual signature of a weapon

that it would leave on a specimen or bullet,

sample bullet, and see if you can match that

up with the bullet that you have removed from

the body of the victim.

Q. Right. Your Honor, would you

describe for the jury the kind of bullet,

projectile -- but bullets are we're talking

about here -- that is involved in this case?

A. We're talking about a bullet that is

nominally a .308 diameter, commonly known as

a .30-caliber bullet. The allegation of the

State was that that bullet was fired from a

weapon known as a 30-06, in other words,

a .30-caliber weapon firing a cartridge

that was based on a military cartridge known

as .30-caliber of 1906.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

698

It was a modification of the

earlier .30-caliber of the model 1903 which

resulted in a shortening of the case neck of

that cartridge, a reduction of the weight of

the initial military bullet from 220 grains

down to appointed 150-grain bullet. That

became known as a 30-06.

The actual caliber of the projectile

is .308. In European terms that is known as

a 7.62 by 63 millimeter cartridge. We know

it as a 30-06.

Q. Judge, would you describe for the

jury the difference between a military bullet

or a hard point and a solt-point bullet?

A. As a result of the Geneva Convention,

the military establishments of most of the

world agreed to not use expanding bullets for

humane purposes. In the latter part of the

19th Century, the English in India were

concerned about the lack of stopping power

that their bullets showed on some of the

native population, so they had a dumb dumb

arsenal in India.

They started producing a bullet with

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

699

a large amount of lead exposed at the tip of

the bullet, and in certain instances hollow

pointed, that is, the bullet has a hole in

the front or a large amount of lead exposed,

and that would cause the bullet to expand

when it hit flesh, which would result in a

recovered bullet looking something like a

mushroom. That caused a very, very bad

wound.

So as a humane matter, most of the

world has agreed not to use soft-point

bullets, and they use what they call full

metal jacketed bullets, where the point of

the bullet is covered with a gilding of steel

or brass or composite jacket so it does not

expand. Most bullets still have a lead core.

Q. Would you explain how the bullets are

manufactured by various manufacturers in

terms of the composition of the lead and the

similarity from batch to batch?

A. Regarding the case at hand, the

situation is this: A manufacturer, say

Remmington, Winchester or Olin, Federal, when

they make up a batch of bullets, they are

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

700

faced with this: They do not have any

machines that are dedicated to one particular

type of bullet. So what happens, they may

make a run of twenty-five million or

thirty-five million of a given type a bullet,

say 150-grain .308 bullets.

Then after they make that run, they

may switch over to 6.5 millimeter with the

same machine and run fifteen to twenty

million of those. Then when it comes time to

convert it back to .30-caliber, which was

the .308, they can't get the tolerances

exactly as they were before, so what they

tend to do is they run batches which they

call lots, L O T S, and they give each batch

a lot number.

When they load up ammunition, that

is, the completed cartridge, they generally

try to make the lots consistent so that the

customer can be assured that he will get

reasonable accuracy and predictability with

any cartridge that he buys from this

company.

So what happens is they have a lot

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

701

of bullets or a batch of bullets with an

assigned lot number. The powder varies, too,

from one batch number, so they'll have a lot

number assigned to a particular batch of

powder and they'll have a batch with a lot

number assigned to the cartridge case that is

to be used in the loaded cartridge. They

will also do the same with primer.

So when they make a run, a batch of

these cartridges, everything will have

similar lot numbers, in other words, the

bullets might be EO71565J3 with a number on

that, and the same with the cartridge. They

will use the same run or batch of lead, the

same run or batch of gilding, the same run or

batch of copper or alloy or brass for the

cartridge case and the same applies.

So what happens is if you run a

metallurgical analysis on any of the

materials, you will expect to find that there

is a metallurgical consistency from one

cartridge to the next in the same batch, from

one sample of powder taken out of a cartridge

with another in the same batch, and the same

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

702

with the bullets, the gilding metal of the

jacket will be the same and the lead cores

would be the same.

Q. Thank you, Judge. Have you

familiarized yourself with the death slug in

this case?

A. I have, sir.

Q. Have you familiarizeed yourself with

other bullets and cartridges that were found

in an evidence bundle in this case?

A. Yes, sir. What seems to have

happened is that when the rifle in question

was recovered, there were four unfired

cartridge cases that were recovered along

with the rifle and one fired cartridge case.

A primitive metallurgical analysis done some

thirty years ago revealed or suggests that

the fired cartridge case and the four unfired

cartridge cases are metallurgically

identical, that is, they are from the same

lot.

The bullets from the four unfired

cartridge cases are metallurgically identical

when the lead cores are analyzed, whereas the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

703

bullet removed from Dr. King is not

identical. It is metallurgically different

in its composition, which would suggest it is

not from the same lot. That would be totally

contrary to the policies of the ammunition

companies.

Q. Let us understand what it is you are

saying here. It is that the evidence bullets

that were found in the bundle, the evidence

bundle that was dropped, have a different

metallurgical composition than the slug that

was taken from Dr. King's body?

A. That's correct.

Q. Are you saying --

A. Further, the significance of that is

developed by the fact that this cartridge

case that appears to have definitely been

fired in the rifle that is in evidence is in

fact of the same lot as the other four

unfired cartridges. You would expect the

bullet that had been removed from Dr. King's

body to have been of the same lot.

That suggests that this bullet was

not fired from that empty cartridge case that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

704

was found with the rifle, and it was

definitely fired in the rifle as per some

tests that were run on that cartridge and

that rifle and other sample cartridges.

Q. All right. Thank you. Now, would

you tell the jury about the nature of the

weapon -- we're going to take a look at that

in a minute -- but the nature of the weapon

as you understand it, the alleged murder

weapon in this case?

A. The murder weapon in this case is a

Remmington 760 Gamemaster, caliber 30-06.

Q. And what is significant about the 760

Gamemaster rifle in terms of its comparison

with other 30-06's?

A. It is what is known as a pump-action

rifle. It is basically the only one still

manufactured in America, though Browning last

year came out with a weapon similarly

activated.

At one time it was popular, but over

the years since the end of the 19th century

that is basically the only remaining

center-fire pump-action rifle. There is also

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

705

a slightly different version of that which is

a semiautomatic weapon.

Q. Is there a counterpart weapon that is

a military issue?

A. Well, I wouldn't say it is exactly a

counterpart, but what you are talking about

is .30-caliber weapons generally. It is

perhaps the most popular caliber in America.

You have several weapons that will

fire an identical bullet. By that, I mean

that if you manufactured a lot of or a batch

of these bullets, you could load those

bullets correctly in several different

caliber weapons.

One is what is known as a 308

Winchester, which is a civilian nomenclature

applied to something known as a 76 2x51 nail

round. It was adopted in 1954 by the U. S.

Government and most of the NATO forces after

some tests. It also fires a .308 bullet.

Likewise, there is what is known as

a 300 Holland & Holland Magnum, a 30 Supra is

another name for it, and it fires a .308

bullet, the same one. It you hand load, you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

706

can take a .308 bullet that you would buy in

a gun shop, and if it is suitable for your

purposes, you could load that in a 308

Winchester, a 30-06, a 300 H&H, also in a 300

Winchester Magnum.

You can load that very same bullet

in a 300 Weatherby. Now you can load it

in -- let's see, I'm talking about factory

ammunition only -- a 30 x 378 Weatherby, and

they have a 330 Super Magnum that Remmington

has that will take the same bullet.

There is something Laseroni has out

called a WarBird, a very specialized thing.

There is a company called Dakota that puts

one out. They all use this exact same .308

bullet.

Now, what happens, back to your

question about the military, is currently,

since it is a standard NATO round, you have

such items as the M-60 machine gun, which

we're not talking about here, but you do have

what is known as the M-14, which was adopted

in 1956 as the standard battle weapon for the

U.S. military, that is, the Marine Corps and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

707

the Army, that has been superseded by the

M-16 family of weapons.

There is also an M-21, which is a

sniper edition of the M-14. You have an

M-24, which is a Winchester Model 70 that the

military used in the late 1960's that was a

bolt-action sniper weapon.

You have a version of the Remmington

700 bolt-action weapon that the military

currently uses as a sniper weapon, along with

refurbished editions of the M-21. You have

various and sundry permutations of weaponry

that are .30-caliber that the military has

used from time to time.

On the civilian market there are

also a number of semiautomatic weapons that

had military intentions initially, such as

the F. N. Fowl that was commonly available

and the G3/H and K91, which are available

from time to time. So there are a number of

weapons that will be such as to fire a

similar bullet.

Q. And were there a number of weapons

that could fire such a bullet back in 1969?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

708

A. There were. A number I could think

of. The 308 Winchester was popular.

The 30-06 was even more popular at the

time. Those two would have probably been

what you would have encountered if you were

talking about a hunting caliber center-firing

30-06 or a 308 Winchester. You also have

the old .30-30, which fires a similar

diameter bullet, but that would be a

blunt-nosed slug, which is an entirely

different design for feeding through a

tubular magazine.

You also had a.30-40 Frig that was

this use starting from 1892 and the U.S.

military used a .308 slug,, and if somebody

was shooting one of those, you would have had

it firing a similar bullet. Or if someone

hand-loaded it, that would still be the

case. There were very many foreign copies of

the same weapon.

Q. So any one of those range of weapons

could have fired this type of slug at that

time?

A. That's correct, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

709

MR. PEPPER: If it please the

Court, I'd like to have the witness examine

the weapon in evidence.

(Rifle passed to the witness.)

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Do you recognize that

weapon?

A. Yes, that's the 760 Gamemaster in

evidence in this case.

Q. What can you tell the jury about this

particular weapon?

A. Although it doesn't exactly look it

right now, it is a fairly new weapon. It has

a Redfield 2 to 7 variable scope on it. It

is mounted in Weaver scope rings, and mounts

it is a pump-action weapon. And it is

from the evidence, the marking on the

barrel, 30-06 in caliber.

Q. Did you have occasion to consider

this weapon as the murder weapon in this case

in some degree of depth and careful

consideration?

A. I did, sir.

Q. When was that?

A. That was during the course of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

710

proceedings brought by the late James Earl

Ray, what are known as post-conviction relief

proceedings to challenge his conviction.

Mr. Ray had never confessed to the

killing of Dr. King, but he had entered what

is known as an Alford versus North Carolina

plea. That is a plea delivered under the

principle of the case of Alford versus North

Carolina, which is a moderately old U.S.

Supreme Court case that stands for the

proposition that you may plead guilty even if

you are not actually guilty if you believe it

is in your best interest to do so, from all

of the proof in evidence you think it in your

best interest to do that and you did it

freely, voluntarily, knowingly, advisedly and

intelligently if the State otherwise has a

reasonable factual basis upon which to

proceed.

In other words, you might say you

may plead guilty even if you are not guilty

if you think that is in your best interest if

the State otherwise has a reasonable factual

basis upon which to proceed. In other words,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

711

you might say you may cop out and plead

guilty even if you are not guilty if that is

in your best interest if the State has some

case that they can go forward upon.

The entirety of that case, according

to the petitioner's theory, was based on this

rifle, which is what hooked him up with the

case. During the course of reviewing the

record for this matter, it developed that

there was a transcript of James Earl Ray's

guilty plea.

It develops that Mr. Ray aforesaid

had never actually confessed to the killing

of Dr. King. I believe there are at least

two places in that transcript that revealed

that when an investigator for the District

Attorney's office testified during the course

of the guilty plea procedings and indicated

that James Earl Ray acted alone, in at least

one instance Mr. Ray rose and in sort of a

mild outburst indicated that that was not

true, that he did not act by himself,

whereupon a recess was taken. That happened

again. Another recess was taken. And then

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

712

he did not rise the third time. They then

went through the process.

It is not unusual, and we have a lot

of cases that are disposed of on what we call

Alford pleas. In other words, the defendant

has a criminal record that would be revealed

to a jury in the event that he testified

which might be something that he would be

leery of. There would be an instruction

given to the jury to the effect that if the

defendant testifies and you find that he has

any felony convictions, you are not to

consider this as touching upon his guilt or

innocence but you may consider it in terms of

evaluating his credibility.

Well, unless there is an exceptional

situation, and you get in front of a jury and

they find out you've got a criminal history,

they are not going to look at you as well as

they might have otherwise even in spite of

the instructions give by the judge. You may

think that the case is so outrageous or so

gross or horrible that you don't really want

to take your chances in front of a jury and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

713

you will settle for what has been offered.

So that is what we had going on here

as far as the petitioner's theory. In other

words, at the time, considering the person

who was slain, the public outcry and uproar

and the possible sentence he could have

gotten, he thought it was in his interest to

enter what is known as an Alford plea.

Q. Now, Judge Brown, how long did you

preside over those proceedings?

A. I'd like to say about three years.

It all sort of shifts into a blur. It got in

my courtroom, there was at that time a set of

laws and cases that had been decided that

basically caused me to deny the petition of

James Earl Ray for not being timely.

However, I did note that there was a

loophole in the existing laws in the State of

Tennessee, and it was this: A person could

be sitting on death row, let's say, and

through the use of DNA evidence he could

prove his absolute innocence. But unless he

had filed that case within the existing

statute of limitations for post-conviction

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

714

relief proceedings, which at that time was

three years, and raised that evidence or he

was able to avail himself of what was known

as petition of era crim nobis, which has been

an ancient thing, of within one year, then he

had no remedy.

The law abhors a situation which is

legal where there is no judicial remedy,

which, of course, the only thing he could do

was apply to the governor's office for

clemency.

So what I ordered is that the

petition would be denied, but I would allow

the petitioner to put on what is known as a

proffer of proof. In other words, if he were

allowed to present this evidence, this is

what it would show so an appellate court

could determine whether or not the law needed

to be reviewed.

Well, in any event, I ordered that

the rifle be retested. That was in

accordance with an order given by the late

Preston Battle, who was the original judge.

In 1968 Judge Battle entered an order that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

715

said the rifle was to be tellsed since he was

not satisfied with the ballistics tests that

had been run at that point. But that rifle

was never retested.

So I ordered it retested. It went

to the Court of Criminal Appeals who went

along with the prosecutorial side of things

and declined to allow that rifle to be

retested and issued a stay.

Well, a few weeks after that stay

was issued, it developed that the

legislature, which I was aware of, had been

working on a new post-conviction relief

statute and they passed that statute and they

said if there is new scientific methodology

that would establish the innocence of a

petitioner, there is no statute of

limitations, and such post-conviction relief

petitions have no time limit on when they can

be filed and no time limit on when they can

be reopened for showing by new scientific

evidence or methodology that the defendant is

innocent. That is so you don't get someone

stuck on death row when there is methodology

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

716

such as DNA testing that would show he is not

the fellow.

Q. Judge Brown, in the course of

preceding over those proceedings for

post-conviction relief, did you consider very

carefully the testing history of that rifle

and familiarize yourself with it?

A. I did, sir. I thought that it was

totally inadequate. At the time this weapon

was tested by the FBI, what they did is they

took four cartridges and fired them through

this weapon into what is known as cotton

waste. If you fire a high-velocity

projectile into cotton waste, you totally

obliterate, that is, destroy, the fine

striations that would enable you to do a

valid ballistics test.

The only thing you can get to out of

that would be the basal characteristics, in

other words, the base characteristics, which

would be this weapon fired a .30-caliber

bullet of .308 in diameter, and it had four

lands and grooves with an apparent right-hand

twist.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

717

One thing they never did resolve out

of that was what was the rate of twist.

Historically 30-06's had rates of twist of

one full turn in every ten inches. Weapons

that are designed from the front end as 308

weapons have one full turn every twelve

inches, though there are examples of each

where the rifling twist is as the other would

be. It depends upon what you are trying to

achieve with the weapon, whether you think

you will fire a heavier bullet or a lighter

bullet for the caliber.

But, in any event, the tests that

they did indicated -- the tests that they did

were totally incapable of giving a valid

basis of comparison to determine whether the

bullet removed from the body of Dr. King was

in fact fired from this weapon.

Now, in any event, there are some

other things that happened that I became

aware of during the course of my examination

of the record. One thing, I believe Mr. Key

came up with this, that is when I asked for

an inventory of all evidence in the case, he

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

718

noted that there was a picture of the bullet

or the slug that was removed from Dr. King's

body before it was transmitted to the FBI.

That picture revealed that the bullet was

intact, though mushroomed.

What the FBI sent back after the

conclusion of the test was three jacket

fragments and three lead core fragments that

had been cut as though you were taking a

banana and just pulled the peels all the way

off of the banana and then took a knife and

cut the banana length-wise in three equal

sections.

Q. Judge, let me just stop you there.

Let me put this picture up. Is that the

photograph you referred to?

A. You found the picture, I see. It

looks similar to that. I can't say if that

is the actual item in evidence.

Q. Does it look similar to the evidence

photo? That was a photograph of three

fragments?

A. Right.

Q. So would you describe, as best can

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

719

you --

A. What you can see in the lower

right-hand corner is the jacket itself. It

has been peeled back by a mushroom process.

What you are looking at is the other two

items are pieces of the lead core.

Q. Would you explain how that could

occur.

A. Well, it could be that it was not a

very well-constructed bullet and it simply

fell out at some time during the course of

testing. But what I found later in there was

not just what you look at there but before

the jacket had been peeled back so there are

three separate fragments to the jacket

itself.

Q. So the bullet that was taken from Dr.

King's body was in one piece?

A. It was in one piece. It is a hunting

bullet. It is a soft-core bullet. That

bullet is designed for the human harvesting

of animals. You don't want an animal to

suffer. So what you want is for the maximum

energy of the rifle to be dumped into the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

720

target so it dies quickly due to massive

injuries. It mushrooms so the bullet

transfers most of its energy into the animal

rather than putting a clean hole through it.

If you were to shoot an animal

between one hundred and about three hundred

fifty pounds, any of the animals that are

typical of this continent, with a 30-06 from

say under a hundred fifty yards, which would

be typical hunting range, if you got a solid

torso hit in the lung or heart area, you

could pretty much count on that animal

dying. That would be a non-survivable

wound.

You would dump the entire energy of

the weapon into the target, and that would be

about a ton and a half of energy at somewhere

between a hundred fifty yards down to close

to the muzzle.

In other words, if you fired this

weapon, you would have 150-grain bullet

moving at a nominal velocity, and with the

type of ammo they were likely to have had in

1968, at about twenty-seven hundred,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

721

twenty-seven hundred fifty feet per second,

which would leave you going on three thousand

foot pounds of energy.

In other words, if you put a scale

in front of the muzzle of this rifle, one

foot in front of it, and fired it, you could

register what that bullet weighed, and it

would weigh about a ten and a half when it

hit this scale.

What usually happens is when you

shoot somebody with a military bullet, which

is a full metal jacket, you put a nice clean

hole in them and most of the energy is dumped

in the dirt or in a tree or rock behind the

target. If you shoot an animal with this,

you dump all the energy in the animal and it

expires quickly.

Generally hunters prefer these days

to have the bullet completely penetrate the

animal so you can leave a blood trail. But I

will assure you it leaves a much bigger hole

on the way out then it does going in.

If you shoot a deer, very seldom

will one of them drop right in its tracks.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

722

It will usually take off and run twenty-five,

a hundred fifty yards, and you've got the

task of tracking that animal through the

underbrush until you find the body which has

expired from blood loss.

If you shoot the animal right and

the bullet does not penetrate downward but

stays inside and disintegrates, which is

known as a bullet failure, then you may still

disrupt the animal's central nervous system

and it will drop in its tracks. That happens

from time to time.

Q. Judge, do you recall from the

evidence before you at that time how the

petitioner came to buy that particular rifle?

A. What seems to have happened from the

record is that James Earl Ray went into a

business that sold firearms and bought what

is known as a 243 Winchester. It is one of

the 308 rounds that we had been talking about

or at least the cartridge case, neck down,

to .243 caliber. In other words, about six

millimeters versus seven point six two

millimeter.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

723

He brought it back the next day and

advised the proprietor that he had been told

or advised to get a .30-caliber weapon,

whereupon he reportedly purchased this item

right here and they mounted a scope on this

weapon.

Q. Judge, I'm going to come to the

scope, but could I ask you, was the 243

Winchester not an adequate rifle for the

purpose that this one was allegedly used for?

A. Actually a 243 actually probably

would have been a better weapon for the

purpose than this would have been, commonly

used to dispatch deer and also varments.

Also, it is a pretty accurate round, and

we're talking about a range that is less than

a hundred fifty yards, if you have any idea

of the ultimate layout of the scene, which is

Dr. King at the Lorraine Hotel with the

apparent point of firing being somewhere

within a hundred fifty yards.

Q. The 243 Winchester in fact was as

good or a better a rifle for the purpose of

assassination than that weapon?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

724

A. At least as well. It would have been

quite a bit better caliber than the one that

was used to kill President John F. Kennedy.

Q. Why, then, in your opinion, after

considering the varieties of the two rifles

and the choice ultimately settling on this

30-06, why was petitioner instructed to buy

this caliber rifle?

A. Based on the entirety of the record

and the entirety of the circumstances of the

case, it was my belief that it was so there

could be a number of common-caliber weapons

that might have been on the scene of the

killing.

Q. That would have had the same

caliber -- produced the same caliber bullet?

A. Same caliber bullet. If the test for

ballistic comparison purposes were run as

they were by the FBI, that is, firing the

sample projectiles into cotton waste so that

you could not get more striations on them so

you could compare the bullets with what was

taken from Dr. King's body, you would have

about sixteen or so million weapons that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

725

could have been the one that fired this

bullet.

I think Remmington ultimately made

right now somewhere around eight or nine

million of these using the same barrel

machinery, either with this permutation of

the 760 Gamemaster, the 740 semiauto or the

Model 700 bolt-action series.

Q. Moving on to the scope, you were

about to tell us about what you concluded

with respect to the scope.

A. It is interesting in that the

proprietor of the shop never did what they

call polarimated this scope. You can't just

take a new rifle with a scope mount on it,

put some rings on it and then put a scope on

it and expect to hit anything. You've got to

zero the thing. That is not very neat.

There is a device called a

polarimeter, which looks like a small

telescope, that has a little spindle that

will fit down in the muzzle of this weapon.

Usually when you get a polarimater, they give

you a number of spindles that will fit most

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

726

common calibers.

You put that spindle-mounted

polarimater into the muzzle, you line it up.

There are some crosshairs on it. You take

these scaps right here of the scope and

you'll see in here a slot. What you do is

you move these screws or these devices around

using a coin until you get the crosshairs on

the scope matching the crosshairs on the

polarimater.

There is another alternative method

that you can use with a bolt action, which is

to take the bolt out, and the receiver will

be open. You lay this rifle on a sandbag and

you aim down the barrel itself at some item

about a hundred yards away, a small circular

item, and you try to align it in the middle

of the bore with the same amount of the bore

showing around this item. Then you

manipulate the adjustment knobs on the scope

to align the crosshairs with the item one

hundred yards away, and you keep looking back

and forth.

As you can see with this rifle, it

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

727

has got a closed receiver, so you cannot

bore-sight this using that particular

method. You'd have to polarimate it.

It has been my experience over the

last thirty years firing I don't know how

many hundreds of rifles that even when do you

get it polarimated or you bore a sight, right

after, when you take it out to the range to

finalize your sight-in process and you put up

a target at about twenty-five yards distance,

that I would say would be about the size of

one of these picture frames on the wall, you

might be lucky to get it in at the bottom

left-hand corner at twenty-five yards. Then

you'd have to dial in sixty clicks up, sixty

clicks to the right or left to get it close

on and then back out to a hundred yards and

then try to sight the thing in further, and

by a slow process make it so that the bullet

impacts where your crosshairs are located.

Now, usually what you do on a

.30-caliber weapon, if you are a hunter or

somebody else, you try and get the typical

bullet impact approximately two inches, maybe

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

728

an inch and be a half or two inches, above

point of aim. That would put your rifle dead

on at two hundred yards, maybe two fifty

actually, two hundred fifty yards.

That would mean if you fired at a

target with the weapon cited in like that at

twenty-five yards, you'd hit with a scope

like this on it about three quarters of an

inch to an inch below the target. At about

fifty yards you would start crossing over

that target line. At about sixty-five to

seventy you would hit right on.

At one hundred yards you'd be about

an inch and a half, inch point nine, maybe

two inches high. You'd be slightly over that

at two hundred yards. And at two hundred

fifty you'd be dead on. And at three hundred

you might be six or seven inches low.

So you would have to sight this

thing in. It does not appear that this

weapon was ever sighted in.

Now, there was also an FBI report in

the record that talked about this weapon

having been test-fired shortly after it was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

729

taken into evidence. And that report

revealed that it shot several feet to one

side at a hundred yards and slightly half

that low. So this does not appear to have

been a sighted-in weapon.

Now, it is possible that it could

have been knocked out of zero, but this rifle

is not one for that to be something that was

as likely as it would be with other weapons.

You will note that it has got a

two-piece stock. This stock really is not

firmly affixed to the barrel. There is a

rod, an operating rod, upon which this slide

is affixed. That keeps it from having any

impact on the barrel at all. This barrel is

fixed tight with the receiver. You simply

have a butt stock here which keeps this thing

from occurring like your typical bolt action

where there is wood that goes all the way up

the receiver and up along the barrel which

tends to warp one way or the other depending

upon the temperature and humidity.

So this rifle probably would not

have gotten much out of zero, and what I call

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

730

out of zero is maybe an inch or so one way or

the other. If you get real finicky, you make

sure you get it right back on.

So this weapon, if it was in the

condition it was in three some days, four

some days after it was taken into evidence,

literally could not have hit the broadside of

a barn if somebody was shooting with it at a

target.

That brings up some other

circumstances if you want me to go into it

about what I was observing about the target

conditions themselves.

Q. Yes, I'd like like you to briefly

summarize that. Let me also understand what

you have told us now. Based upon your review

of the --

A. You want me to say it simply? In

other words, you buy one of these, put a

scope sight on it, you've got to sight it

in. It takes a bit of doing. It takes a

little help with some mechanical devices on

the front end. That was not done with this

weapon.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

731

It does not appear that this weapon

was sighted in. And when it was recovered

and first taken into evidence, it would not

hit what it was shooting at. It would hit

several feet to either right or left. I

think it was four feet one way and two feet

down.

Q. Yes. That is what the FBI report

indicates?

A. That's right. Anyway --

Q. Could that rifle scope have been

thrown out that amount had it been dropped on

a sidewalk?

A. That amount, no. I had one of these

very scopes, fell out of a tree and landed on

the bloody thing. Damn near broke my leg.

But I could carry on with the hunt.

Q. The scope was intact?

A. Scope was intact. Rugged scope.

That's why they sold a lot of them, the

Redfield two to seven variable. One of the

earlier variables, but a pretty good one.

Q. Let me just ask you: Moving on,

based upon all this analysis and review of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

732

this rifle, the testing information, the

documentation, is it your opinion that this

weapon was the murder weapon that killed

Martin Luther King, Jr.?

A. Well, I've not discussed the further

ballistics tests I ordered and the result.

But based on the entirety of the record and

the further ballistics tests I had run on

this rifle, it is my opinion this is not the

muder weapon.

Q. Could you just summarize for us the

basis of that opinion?

A. Okay. The basis of that opinion

would be run based on the subsequent

ballistics analysis that was done with this

weapon using scanning electron microscopy to

analyze the sample bullet and compare it with

the slug removed from Dr. King, the

circumstances attendant upon the lack of

similar batch status of the bullets from the

rest the cartridges, this weapon itself in

terms of it not being sighted in and also a

description of the shooting itself in terms

of what supposedly transpired that makes this

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

733

a rather unique weapon.

Now, if you would like, I'll talk

about the ballistics test that I got the

results of.

Q. Yes, please. Go on.

A. Okay. What ultimately happened is I

ordered this rifle thoroughly cleaned for

this reason: It is a new weapon. The bore

has not been shot in. It has not been broken

in. The bores of rifles need to be broken in

just like your car needs to be broken in.

They are still rough.

Remmington was not the worst at

that, but in 1968, 1967, 1966, the firearms

companies were switching over from a lot of

hand labor to machine-manufacturing processes

that had not been perfected. There was a big

hue and cry in the whole gun world about the

defects that you often found with new

products. I know I had to send one back

every four or fifth time I got a hunting

rifle. There was a flaw in it that had to be

sent back for correction.

In any event, I ordered this weapon

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

734

cleaned, because even though it had -- you

can look through it right now. It looks like

you've got a shiny bore. If you look under

it -- at it under certain light conditions,

this whole bore is smeared with jacket

powder. Basically a bullet fired in a

hunting weapon has a lead core. It has a

gilding metal jacket or a bronze jacket, and

there is coating over the top of that.

When you fire it down this bore with

the high heat of the combustion process and

the higher pressure and the velocity, it

leaves trace elements of that jacket all down

the barrel. The more of the barrel that is

broken in and the smoother it gets, the less

it leaves.

When I inspected this weapon

initially, the bore impressed me as quite

filfthy. I used a bore sight. It is a

little device with a light in it. You can

look through this thing. It is absolutely

filfthy.

In any event, I ordered it cleaned.

They apparently did not clean it more than to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

735

run a patch down one or twice through it. I

had given as a suggestion that they use

something known as a file out, which is a

device made by a company known as Outers,

that is nonintrusive.

You fill this barrel with a

chemical. You put a plug in it, an electrode

in it, hook the barrel up to the other

electrode and you leave it for twenty-four

hours and it works a reverse-plating process

and you get all the filings stripped out of

this barrel and it adheres to the electrode.

So you would have a pristinely-clean

weapon in twenty-four hours. They chose not

to do that but to simply run a patch through

it for a number of reasons, which through

mistake -- which was going against their

mistaken understanding of my order -- they

thought I order them not to clean it.

But in any event, they fired

eighteen bullets from this weapon into a

water tank. Twelve of those bullets, that

is, sixty-six point three four or seven five

or sixty-seven percent, showed a similar

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

736

characteristic that was a very unusual

characteristic.

What usually happens when you take a

bullet and you fire it down a rifle barrel is

that the actual diameter of the bullet, that

is, the .308 in this case, would match the

bore diameter. But when you have the bore,

there are some lands, some ribs that stick

down. Those ribs would engrave the bullet.

They would press markings into the bullet.

What was unusual about the

characteristic of the projectiles that were

fired out of this weapon is that there was a

defect somewhere in this barrel that caused

the bullet not to be pressed down but to come

up into this particular flaw. So what you

did is instead of a rounding, say one of

these styrofoam coffee cups, with grooves

that had been indented in that, imagine, if

you can, that there would be a bump that

would be sticking up on the surface.

So that is very unusual and

indicated that there was some shattering in

the tool that was used to make this barrel.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

737

It very seldom happens. It is very rare.

But it was present on these bullets.

Now, because this weapon was not

cleaned, what happened was that the filing

material was being blown out of this flaw.

So one of these bullets would have a gross

reflection of this flaw. The next shot

through it would be somewhat less impressed

because of the filing that had filled up this

defect. The third one would have even less

of an impression. Then the filing would get

blown out. The next bullets through would

not show it to a gross extent.

So you've got twelve bullets with

the same common characteristic, that is, this

raised area on the surface of the bullet.

There was not -- that was not found on the

corresponding portion of the bullet removed

from Dr. King.

Now, using scanning electron

microscopy, you can get a much more clear

view of what you are looking at than the

traditional method. One of the problems with

the so-called experts that were called in on

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

738

this is none of them were really expert in

much of anything concerning firearms other

than simply looking at one bullet, comparing

it with another bullet, in a microscopic

setting.

None of them had any experience in

scanning electron microscopy, none of them

had any significant experience in actually

shooting or using a rifle or anything other

than what they did in the laboratory.

None of them had ever cleaned a

rifle other than I believe the testimony was

that when they found one clogged with mud or

dirt or debris, they would run a rod through

just to get that out so they didn't destruct

the weapon.

In any event, this characteristic

was common. Sixty-seven percent of the

bullets showed it. I ordered the weapon be

be retested once this cleaning was done. The

nature of the defect was such that it would

be expected that one hundred percent of the

rounds fired would show this defect.

If I can give that to you in lay

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

739

terms, it is like this: You are sixty-seven

years old, seventy-four years, you are having

trouble urinating. You go to the doctor. He

says, I think you need to go see a

proctologist, I'm noting a very hard area in

your -- hard something in your prostate

area. The proctologist says, okay, fine, we

need to run some tests. Every test they run

is saying, okay, you've got prostate cancer.

That's where we are with this rifle

here. The next step would have simply been a

confirmation of everything that had gone

before. But this does not appear to be the

rifle that was used to kill Dr. King.

There is another thing about that

that is unusual, too: The testimony that the

barrel of this rifle was rested across a hard

wood window sill, that the gunman, using one

foot to prop himself up, holding on and using

another arm to hold the weapon, he supposedly

rested this barrel on this window sill and

pulled the trigger.

Well, there is an unusual thing

about this one. Being a slide-action, if you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

740

do that, nine times out of ten the slide is

going to cycle itself before the pressure is

dropped in the barrel, and what you'll get is

a blown-up or ruptured shell casing, which

will be quite exciting when it happens.

So this rifle fortuitously is

incapable of being used as they indicated in

the proof that was in the record.

So we've got, one, non-similar lots

of components, two, we've got a rifle that

has never been cited in, three, we've got a

usage suggested for that that is impossible

for this particular type of weapon, and then

in addition, when we run the more advanced

ballistic comparison tests, none of that

matches up.

Q. Judge, after all of that analysis,

you had come to order retesting under very

strict guidelines?

A. Very strict.

Q. The cleaning and the retesting. That

was about to go forward. What happened?

A. Well, they removed me from the case.

They said I was biased towards James Earl

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

741

Ray, which found rather astonishing. If

anybody knows me, me being biased in favor of

a self-avowed racist and bigot is absolutely

disgusting as a concept.

What I've always tried to do is be

fair and impartial and neutral and detached

straight down the middle, and sometimes I

know that upsets people when things don't go

as they expect them to go.

Q. So you were removed from the case by

whom?

A. The Tennessee Court of Criminal

Appeals. It is interesting that was done

before a full transcript was developed. I

must say this: That during the course of

these procedings, whenever the prosecution

didn't like what I was doing, they would run

up and file affidavits, which in my personal

opinion misrepresented the state of the

evidence, and they would go up there to get

an emergency stay before a transcript was

prepared.

Now, one thing that struck me as

quite unusual is one of the affidavits they

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

742

filed in this particular case, which was,

quote, the weapon should not be tested

because if it is tested, it may be damaged,

which would prevent it from being tested in

the future, unquote.

Q. Judge, would you explain to the jury

how firing that caliber weapon might generate

what appears to onlookers to be smoke rising

from a brush area?

A. It is my saying you do not get smoke

from smokeless power, but when you have a

high-intensity cartridge like a 30-06, you

don't, but what you might find is the

following: The compression may cause a

condensation of water, which is a phenomenon

that I've observed from time to time hunting

or shooting, or, two, you may kick up fine

dust in the area immediately in front of the

rifle, or, three, because this rifle slug may

be moving close to the speed of sound, the

shock waive from the bullet passing a bush or

some foliage that has dust on it will cause

it to rise and it will look to the onlooker

like smoke.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

743

Now, there is another thing about

this rifle that is of significance. It goes

back to what you asked me in terms of my

opinion about why the .30-caliber weapon.

Not only could you use a number of civilian

weapons, but if somebody were analyze the

basal characteristics of a slug taken from

Dr. King and this weapon with what the FBI

did, you could not tell whether that weapon

came out of an M-14, a M-21, an M-24 or the

Remmington 700 military sniper weapon that

they had at the time, nor could you tell if

it came out of that.

One of the things that they did not

do is attempt to analyze the twist of the

projectile that was recovered which might

have been helpful. But in any event, what

you have is a situation where let's say you

have one, two, three, four or five people who

have been for one reason or the other

convinced that they were doing something

worthwhile, they could have all been out

there attempting to carry out their own

little particular portion in some perceived

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

744

assassination. Meanwhile, other people could

have been involved, and if any of those

people had been out there, then each of the

.30-caliber weapons they possessed could

have been tied into the case just like this

one was.

Q. That fatal shot could have been fired

from any number of .30-caliber weapons?

A. Any number of .30-caliber weapons,

military or civilian. Let's put it this

way: As a professional involved in the

criminal justice system for a very long time,

as a prosecutor, public defender, defense

lawyer handling murders, robberies, very

serious crimes, this had to be one of the

most inept and incapable, if not downright

incompetent investigations, I've ever seen in

my life.

It would it would have struck me

that if they had really wanted to analyze

bullets fired out of this rifle, they would

have fired them into water, not cotton

waste. It would have struck me that they

would have done a more intense analysis of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

745

what you have over there.

Now, you've got a base of that

bullet that is completely intact, and it is

quite subject to even ordinary ballistic

analysis for striations. They did not do

that.

Q. Judge, on that tack, the FBI reports

indicated that the death slug was too badly

deformed for them to do that kind of

analysis?

A. That's not a badly-deformed slug.

What you have here is an intact base. That

is what you need. What has gone on here is

that most of what is in this record is

something that you would accept on trust.

Ballistics is an arcane subject.

The FBI is supposed to know everything there

is about the subject. In 1996 the FBI was

trusted. The FBI said in our professional

opinion this is not capable of being

analyzed. They didn't do anything on,

absolutely nothing at all, except the worst

things you could do if you wanted to develop

some test results.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

746

Judge Preston Battle looked at what

they supplied, and even back in 1968 he was

not satisfied with these tests, and ordered

that they be redone. So from 1968 up until

James Earl Ray died, there was a resistance

on the part of local authorities to keep this

weapon from being retested.

The first judge ordered it. I

ordered it. When it was tested, sixty-seven

percent of the bullets were found to not

match that murder slug.

MR. PEPPER: Judge Brown, thank

you very much.

THE WITNESS: You are welcome.

MR. GARRISON: I have no

questions of Judge Brown.

THE COURT: Thank you, Judge.

THE WITNESS: Thank you, Judge.

(Witness excused.)

(Jury out.)

(The proceedings were adjourned

at 4:35 p.m.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

747

THE CIRCUIT COURT OF SHELBY COUNTY, TENNESSEE

THIRTIETH JUDICIAL DISTRICT AT MEMPHIS

_____________________________________________

CORETTA SCOTT KING, MARTIN

LUTHER KING, III, BERNICE KING,

DEXTER SCOTT KING and YOLANDA KING,

Plaintiffs,

Vs. Case No. 97242-4 T.D.

LOYD JOWERS and OTHER UNKNOWN

CO-CONSPIRATORS,

Defendants.

_____________________________________________

BE IT REMEMBERED that the

above-captioned cause came on for Trial on

this, the 23rd day of November, 1999, in the

above Court, before the Honorable James E.

Swearengen, Judge presiding, when and where

the following proceedings were had, to wit:

VOLUME VI

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI,

RICHBERGER & WEATHERFORD

COURT REPORTERS

22nd Floor, One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

(901) 529-1999

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

748

- APPEARANCES -

For the Plaintiffs:

MR. WILLIAM PEPPER

Attorney at Law

575 Madison Avenue, Suite 1006

New York, New York 10022

(212) 605-0515

For the Defendant:

MR. LEWIS K. GARRISON, Sr.

Attorney at Law

100 North Main Street, Suite 1025

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

(901) 527-6445

Reported by:

MS. MARGIE J. ROUTHEAUX

Registered Professional Reporter

Daniel, Dillinger, Dominski,

Richberger & Weatherford

2200 One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

749

- INDEX -

WITNESS: PAGE/LINE NUMBER

JERRY FRANCISCO

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:........................ 751/16

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:...................... 768/09

JOHN BILLINGS

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:........................ 773/15

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:...................... 819/04

ROYCE WILBURN

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:........................ 821/03

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:...................... 829/23

SIDNEY J. CARTHEW (By video)

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:........................ 835/12

JOE B. HODGES

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:........................ 858/17

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:...................... 879/25

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:........................ 883/17

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

750

- INDEX CONTINUED -

JAMES W. SMITH

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:........................ 888/25

BARBARA REIS

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:........................ 905/19

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:...................... 915/07

TRIAL EXHIBITS PAGE

6 ----------------- 761

7 ----------------- 773

8 ----------------- 803

9 ----------------- 808

10 ----------------- 827

11 ----------------- 829

12 ----------------- 857

13 ----------------- 888

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

751

P R O C E E D I N G S

THE COURT: Are we ready for the

jury?

MR. PEPPER: Ready, Your Honor.

(Jury enters. )

THE COURT: Good morning. We

are we ready to resume the trial, I think.

Mr. Pepper, call your next witness.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you, Your

Honor. Plaintiffs call Dr. Jerry Francisco

to the stand.

DR. JERRY T. FRANCISCO,

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good morning, Dr. Francisco.

A. Good morning.

Q. Thank you very much for joining us

this morning. For the record, please, would

you state your full name and address.

A. Jerry Thomas Francisco, Memphis,

Tennessee.

Q. And what do you presently do,

Dr. Francisco?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

752

A. As little as possible. I'm retired.

Q. And what was your previous

employment?

A. I was professor of pathology at the

University of Tennessee, County Medical

Examiner for Shelby County.

Q. And what position did you hold in

April of 1968?

A. I was essentially in the same

position -- in pathology at the University of

Tennessee and county medical examiner for

Shelby County.

Q. Would you tell us roughly, prior to

April 4, 1968, how many autopsies had you

performed?

A. I have no idea of the precise number,

but it would be measured in thousands.

Q. Would many of those have been

caused -- those deaths have been caused by

homicide?

A. Yes.

Q. And would many of those homicide

deaths have been caused by gunshot wounds?

A. Yes.

Q. And would a number of those gunshot

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

753

wounds have been rifle shots?

A. Well, the rifle is an unusual weapon,

and it's an uncommon form of gunshot -- at

least in civilian practice.

Q. All right. But did you have previous

experience with respect to deaths caused by

rifle wounds?

A. Yes.

Q. When were you first notified of the

death of Martin Luther -- well, the shooting

of Martin Luther King, Jr.?

A. It was probably from the -- from the

media.

Q. You heard it on the media?

A. That's correct.

Q. Do you recall was that shortly after

the event?

A. Yes.

Q. And what did you do when you heard

about the shooting?

A. Well, the shooting occurred on a

Thursday night. And Thursday night in the

Department of Pathology is a traditional time

in which the faculty gather to have what we

call a conference. It was called the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

754

Thursday night conference in common

parlance.

And several members would usually

get together to have dinner prior to the

conference which started at 7 o'clock. A

friend of mine -- we were having dinner at

what was then the faculty club when we heard

the news that Dr. King had been shot. And we

came to the Institute of Pathology at about

6:45, 7 o'clock, knowing that he was dead,

and proceeded to do the things that needed to

be done.

The conference was cancelled. The

members left with the admonition if I needed

help to give them a call and they would be

glad to assist.

Q. Did you eventually perform the

autopsy on Martin Luther King, Jr.?

A. I did.

Q. Do you recall the date that you

performed that autopsy?

A. No. It was the day he died.

Q. Dr. Francisco, let me provide you

with a copy of this autopsy report just to

assist in the refreshing of your

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

755

recollection.

A. All right.

Q. Okay. Do you see the date of that

report?

A. Yes.

Q. When then was the autopsy performed?

A. April the 4th, 1968.

Q. And your report was dated April 11,

1968?

A. Well, the finalization of this report

was April the 11th, 1968.

Q. Had any work begun on the autopsy

before you arrived, or were you there right

at the beginning and supervised the entire

procedure?

A. The latter. The autopsy does not

start until the pathologist arrives.

Q. Were there any assistants present at

the time?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you recall who they were,

Dr. Francisco?

A. No.

Q. That's understandable. It's a long

time ago. Were there any other persons

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

756

observing the autopsy that you recall?

A. Well, they were not really

observing. There was a law enforcement

officer inside the autopsy suite with a shot

gun, a law enforcement officer outside the

autopsy suite with a shotgun. But as far as

observing the autopsy, no, they were not.

That's not their business. That's not their

purpose. That's not their mission in life.

They played no active role in the autopsy.

Q. Did you employ the standard

procedures for the performance of this

autopsy?

A. Yes.

Q. Are procedures -- do procedures

vary? Are they different in terms of a rifle

wound as opposed to any other type of

gunshot wound?

A. No. There's much -- there's as much

standardization of an autopsy as there is in

trying a case. There's certain overarching

principles that are applied. But in the

detail, there are significant changes and

variations that are professional judgements

that each pathologist makes during his

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

757

autopsy.

Q. That's very helpful if you would

continue to explain these procedures to the

jury. We're calling you, of course, out of

turn. You were originally slated to be a

background witness so that the jury can be

aware of the procedure and the cause of death

and the nature of the wound and so forth.

So it's very helpful that you will address

the jury on these matters.

Did you dictate the -- your

observations as you performed the autopsy?

A. I think so, yes.

Q. And those would have been reflected

in your final report?

A. That's correct.

Q. Could you describe for the jury the

condition of the body when you observed it at

the beginning as you recall?

A. I don't understand the question.

Q. Well, can you describe the --

basically can you describe the condition of

the body that you were about to perform the

autopsy on. What did you observe in terms of

the wound that had been inflicted?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

758

A. Well, it was a gunshot wound to the

jaw which had been surgically altered at the

emergency room in an attempt to stop the

bleeding. Is that what you had in mind?

Q. Yes, that's right. And that was

the -- that was the entry wound?

A. That's correct.

Q. Did you notice an exit wound?

A. There was no exit wound. The bullet

was retained within the body.

Q. To the best of your recollection and

your knowledge at this point, was that entry

wound a single wound?

A. In contrast to a double wound?

Q. In contrast to multiple wounds, yes.

A. Yes, it was a single wound, right.

Q. And where was the -- to the best,

again, of your recollection, where was the

fatal bullet lodged in the body?

A. It was beneath the skin in the back

on the left side.

Q. Inside the circle there is a shaded

raised area. Do you recognize that as the

lodging -- the place where the bullet lodged

as you've described it?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

759

A. It could be. I can't orient myself

with that photograph.

Q. But that could be?

A. Well, I don't know what the

photograph is. I have no idea. I didn't

take it.

Q. The photograph is a photograph of the

body of Martin Luther King on the autopsy

table. And that's the lower left shoulder

blade.

A. Could you turn the photograph around,

please. One more turn. Yes, sir, that is

the correct orientation of the photograph,

and that is a photograph that could be the

location of the bullet beneath the skin.

Q. That is the bullet that could be the

bullet beneath the skin that you have

described?

A. That's correct.

Q. In the course of your performing this

autopsy, were you able to determine the path

of that bullet from entry to the final point

of lodging?

A. Yes.

Q. Could you describe the path of that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

760

bullet for us, please.

A. Front to back, above, downward, right

to left.

Q. Were you able to determine if any --

what -- in the path of the bullet if it hit

any interior organs of the deceased's body?

A. Yes.

Q. Would you describe those for us.

A. The right mandible, or jaw bone, the

right vertebral artery which is the artery

running from the arch of the aorta up into

the head, the spine, T1 and C7, the spinal

cord, upper cervical -- lower cervical, upper

thoracic, the submucosal hemorrhage to the

voice box, the larynx. This is the force of

the bullet passing through. The force around

the bullet path damaged the larynx, and there

was a bruise or hematoma to the upper right

lobe.

Again, this was the force of the

bullet. There are circumferential forces

around the path of a bullet that will bruise

or damage organs not actually hit by the

bullet but in juxtaposition to this bullet

path.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

761

Q. Thank you. And what time did you

determine was the time of -- the actual time

of death?

A. The autopsy does not determine the

time of death. The time of death in most

cases is determined by the time a person is

pronounced. And that's a historical fact.

The autopsy does not, independent of this

historical fact, elaborate and determine a

time of death. The intimation that we had

was some time in the p.m., in the

neighborhood of 4, 5, 6, 7 p.m.

Q. While he was -- if he was shot at

6:01, presuming that the time of death would

have been some time after that, between 6 and

7 p.m.

A. Again, those are historical facts.

And the time of death is determined by the

historical facts, not by autopsy procedures.

MR. PEPPER: Plaintiffs move to

enter the autopsy report.

(Whereupon said document was

marked as Trial Exhibit Number 6.)

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Dr. Francisco, didn't

you trace the path of the bullet in the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

762

body? Did you actually conduct a tracing

procedure with respect to the path of this

bullet?

A. Yes.

Q. And it is as -- and how did you --

how did you actually conduct that tracing

procedure?

A. By looking. It was not difficult to

see what the bullet had passed through in its

passage through the body with the autopsy

techniques because the organs are removed,

the vital structures are removed. It's not

difficult to see what the path of the bullet

was. It's a relatively short path. The

entry point was clearly visualized.

The terminal point was clearly

visualized. And the bullet generally travels

in straight lines through the body. There

are very unusual circumstances in which the

bullet goes in something other than straight

lines. But bullets do not go zig, zag, zig,

zag. They just don't do that. That's not

the way bullets travel in bodies.

Q. Unless they're deflected. As you

said, unless they're deflected by --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

763

A. Well, bullets are hard to deflect.

If the bullet velocity is low enough that a

body part can deflect it, generally the

bullet stops. There are rare

circumstances -- for instance, there are

circumstances in which the bullet enters the

skull and because of low velocity of the

bullet, it will travel along the inner path

of the skull coming around to this side.

But bullets do not entire here and

go over the top of the skull and come out on

this side. They just don't do it like that.

Science fiction notwithstanding, they just

don't do it that way.

Q. Thank you. Did there come a time,

Dr. Francisco, in 1969 when you were asked to

testify before a guilty plea proceeding

presided over by the Criminal Court of Shelby

County?

A. Yes.

Q. And was that proceeding held on the

10th of March, 1969?

A. I presume so. Again, I don't have

records of that date and time. But at

whatever time the records reflect, there was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

764

testimony in the criminal courts of Shelby

County to the guilty plea of James Earl Ray,

and it was necessary to establish cause of

death by testimony.

Q. Dr. Francisco, let me pass to you

for -- again, for refreshing your

recollection, the relevant pages of your

testimony before the guilty plea proceeding.

A. All right.

Q. It begins on Page 30, and you're

subject to direct examination by Mr. Duire.

A. I'm sorry. Was that a question?

Q. No, it's a statement. Now, moving on

to Page 32 -- if you would move to Page 32,

after discussion of the cause of injury, how

death occurred, you were asked: "Did you

recover anything from the body,

Dr. Francisco?" And your answer?

A. "Yes."

Q. The question was: "I'm going to show

you an object and ask you if you can

identify" -- "and ask you if you can identify

those, Dr. Francisco." Your answer was --

A. "Yes."

Q. "And what is that, please." And then

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

765

you were shown, I believe -- do you recall

this photograph of bullet fragments that you

were shown?

A. I've seen that photograph more than

once. Do you have the bullet?

Q. We don't -- we don't have the bullet

in this courtroom. But do you recognize that

as a depiction of what they showed you on

that day?

A. Well, that certainly could be, yes.

That's the jacket and the two pieces of lead

that were present in that bullet. So they

certainly could be the bullet that I was

shown. However, there is a marking on the

jacket that is the autopsy number that

defines the jacket as the jacket that I

removed. And I cannot see that from this

photograph.

Q. But the question was at that time --

if this is a correct depiction -- this is the

bullet that was removed from the body at the

time of autopsy. And you answered -- you

answered: "This is the bullet that was

removed from the body at the time of

autopsy."

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

766

A. Let me make something very clear.

This photograph is not necessarily the

photograph of the bullet that was shown to me

during this testimony. What was shown to me

during this testimony was the bullet that I

removed. And I looked at that bullet, and I

said, yes, this is the bullet I removed.

I don't know anything about this

photograph. But I do know that during this

testimony the bullet that was shown to me was

the bullet I removed.

Q. Dr. Francisco, could you describe the

bullet that you removed from Dr. King's

body.

A. It was a bullet with a jacket and

with lead.

Q. Was it intact?

A. It was damaged. A jacketed bullet,

in which the jacket has been peeled back, is

a damaged bullet in which the lead that's on

the inside is loose and can come out very

easily, very readily --

Q. Dr. Francisco --

A. -- as it did in this case.

Q. Was the bullet that you removed from

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

767

Dr. King's body one piece, an intact bullet?

A. What I removed from Dr. King was a

bullet that was intact at the time I removed

it. However, there were two pieces of lead.

One that was very daintily attached to the

other because of its damaging and, therefore,

any kind of handling, moving or examination,

these two pieces of lead could come detached

from one another. The lead that was still

inside the jacket can come loose at any time

and, therefore, representing three pieces at

some later time because it's been altered in

the examination process, just the handling

process.

Q. How could you -- how did you identify

the fragments that were shown to you though

as the bullet that you removed?

A. Because it had the same topography,

configuration, color, shape, of a photograph

I made of that bullet at the time I removed

it from the autopsy. It also had my autopsy

number scratched on the base of the jacket,

which is the most vital part of bullet, the

numbers 252.

Q. So you have no question then that the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

768

bullet you were shown at the time of the

guilty plea hearing was the bullet that you

took from Dr. King's body even though it was

in different pieces?

A. No question whatsoever.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you, Your

Honor. Nothing further.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Dr. Francisco, we have talked about

the wound. Was it a -- what you would

classify as a large wound -- the entry wound,

was it a large wound?

A. It had been enlarged by surgery. It

was not particularly large in terms of what

wounds -- what bullet wounds can cause. But

it had been enlarged by surgery. It

certainly was a lethal one.

Q. Did you do anything to probe the

wound? Insert anything to trace the path of

it?

A. No. You don't -- you don't probe

wounds for determining the path. That has a

tendency to alter the wound. And probes are

not something you do if you're going to do an

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

769

autopsy.

Q. Which side of the jaw was it that --

it's your understanding it would have been

his right side?

A. To the right side.

Q. Just under the jaw bone?

A. Well, it was just adjacent to the

angle of the mouth. It was present, as I'm

pointing right here, just to the angle of the

right side of the mouth.

Q. Dr. Francisco, I know you've

performed thousands of autopsies. And are

you familiar with calibers of weapons and a

bullet that comes from a certain caliber?

A. In a general sense. The caliber

refers to the cross-sectional diameter of the

bullet. A .7 millimeter bullet is 7

millimeters in cross-sectional diameter. A

.22 caliber bullet is 22 one-hundredths of an

inch in cross-sectional diameter. I'm

familiar in that sense, yes.

Q. Would this bullet have been a bullet

that would have been fired from or shot from

a weapon -- a rifle or a 30 aught 6?

A. Could have been.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

770

Q. Was it conformed to that size?

A. Approximately that size, yes.

Q. And was this bullet an expanding type

bullet where it -- or could you determine?

You said it was damaged.

A. Well, this is a partial jacketed

bullet. And the whole purpose of a partial

jacket is that it expands as it strikes a

hard object and, therefore, mushrooms and

produces a larger surface after it strikes

than before it strikes.

Q. Now, Dr. Francisco, you were asked by

the district attorney to visit the scene of

where this supposedly occurred. Am I

correct, sir?

A. That's correct.

Q. And did you -- did you visit the

scene in the so-called rooming house where

you were upstairs in a bathroom and also down

in the lower area where there was -- up over

Mulberry Street but yet it was raised where

there were some bushes, I think, that had

been cut? Did you visit both of those

scenes?

A. I did.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

771

Q. And did you also visit the balcony

where Dr. King was supposed to be standing?

A. I did.

Q. And were you told as to what position

he was supposed to be in at the time of the

wound -- the shot?

A. Well, there was a photograph. There

was a photograph made of his position just

before the shot was fired. So from the

photograph I had seen what position it was.

Q. All right, sir. And did you

determine or form any opinion as to what type

of path this projectile took from the weapon

it was fired from?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. And what type of path did it

seem -- appear to you that it took from the

time it was fired from the weapon?

A. It appeared to be in a downward

path.

Q. All right. Based upon your visiting

the scene and the wooded area and the

bathroom window and your observation of the

wound and examining of the body, which

location did you testify that it appeared to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

772

you that the shot came from?

A. Well, the shot could not have come

from the base of the building. You couldn't

see Dr. King from the base of the building

because the land was up. You would have to

be up closer to the ridge itself to be able

to see Dr. King in that location. From the

bathroom window you could see the body, and

it was quite consistent with having been

fired from that bathroom window.

Q. When you visited the scene,

Dr. Francisco, there were some trees -- I

think what have been referred to as trees or

bushes. Had they been cut at that time?

A. Yes, they had.

MR. GARRISON: That's all I

have. Thank you.

THE COURT: Anything further,

Mr. Pepper?

MR. PEPPER: I have nothing

further, Judge.

THE COURT: All right. Doctor,

you may stand down. Thank you, sir.

(Witness excused.)

MR. PEPPER: We move to admit

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

773

the guilty plea proceeding testimony of

Dr. Francisco.

THE COURT: All right. Exhibit

7.

(Whereupon said document was

marked as Trial Exhibit Number 7.)

THE COURT: All right. Call

your next witness.

MR. PEPPER: Plaintiffs call

Mr. John Billings.

JOHN E. BILLINGS, Jr.,

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Morning, Mr. Billings.

A. Morning, Mr. Pepper.

Q. Thank you for joining us this

morning. Would you please state your name --

full name and address for the record,

please.

A. John Edward Billings, Jr., 787 West

Drive, Memphis, Tennessee.

Q. And would you tell us, what is your

occupation?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

774

A. Private investigator.

Q. And how long have you been a private

investigator?

A. 30 years this year.

Q. And are you licensed by the State of

Tennessee?

A. Yes, sir, I am.

Q. Did there come a time, Mr. Billings,

when you became involved in the investigation

of the assassination of Martin Luther King?

A. Yes, sir. My involvement began on

April 4th, 1968.

Q. And how did your involvement begin on

April 4th, 1968?

A. Well, sir, I was a junior at Memphis

State University and I was working six

afternoons and evenings a week at St.

Joseph's Hospital. I was a surgical

assistant. And we -- I had just come on at

4 o'clock that afternoon. And it was kind of

a slow day. We had a few operations going in

surgery.

And we were up on the sixth floor.

And we were standing outside the nurses'

lounge, which is across from recovery and the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

775

cast room, which is a non-sterile room. And

I remember standing out in the hallway when

Mrs. Matthews, who is the head scrub nurse,

came running out the door and said, get the

cast room ready, Martin Luther King has been

shot -- been shot in the leg.

So we were sort of stunned. And we

went over to start getting the cast room

ready, which was a non-sterile room. We were

kind of excited because, you know, we were

getting ready to meet Dr. King. And being --

the cast room would be a flesh wound, so we

didn't think it was a severe wound. But

within a minute or two Ms. Matthews came back

out and yelled at us to get Room 1 ready.

And that's all she had to say because Room 1

was the neuro room, so we knew it was a head

shot.

Then she asked me to go around

through surgery around by the back elevators

and get a gurney and come back up and meet

her. So I went around -- walked through

surgery and went around to get the gurney.

And before I could get the gurney, I noticed

two male figures beating on the door. There

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

776

were these frosted doors back there, and they

had a recessed button that would open them

up, and they were having a hard time finding

it.

So I reached over and opened the

door. And two men -- two male whites

carrying machine guns -- what appeared to be

machine guns at the time -- came running

through the doors and down the hall. And

this sort of startled a number of people,

including some doctors who were doing surgery

noticed this. So I got the gurney, and I

started back up the hall. And Mrs. Matthews

rounded the corner and met me. And she told

us specifically to go down the back elevator

which went directly into the waiting room

from the top floor down, and to bring

Dr. King back up when it was ready for

surgery.

And she was explicit about not

letting anyone -- mainly the press or anybody

else on the elevator that was not concerned

with Dr. King's health couldn't come back.

So we took the gurney and went down -- when

the doors opened to the emergency room -- the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

777

emergency room was filling up with people

which appeared to be Dr. King's entourage or

his group of people. And I think

Dr. Abernathy had just gotten there.

And there was a -- kind of a

quietness about it. There was no panic.

There was no wailing or anything. It was

just sort of like shock. Everybody -- it was

like a bomb had gone off.

So I went around into Emergency Room

1 through some other doors, and that was the

room they were working on Dr. King. They had

just brought him in at that time. And we

went into the room. We were wearing surgical

greens, so we went into the room and stood

against the wall and watched them work on

Dr. King. I believe Dr. Rufus Brown was the

resident in the emergency room that night,

and he was sort of leading the team.

And Dr. Julia who was our neuro --

resident surgeon was also -- had just

arrived, and they were working, it seems

like, in teams. There were other doctors who

were coming in. All the residents were busy

working, and we just waited against the wall

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

778

and didn't say anything.

This went on for a while. They were

feverishly working -- it seemed like for 30,

45 minutes or so.

Q. Let me interrupt you there. At that

point in time when they were feverishly

working on Dr. King, was it evident to you

that he was alive -- he was still alive?

A. Well, it appeared that they were

because they were doing, it appeared to me,

all the things -- of course, Dr. King was

sort of against the wall at the back of the

room. And I could see the backs of the

doctors feverishly working. They were doing

all the things that I knew of to bring him

around and resuscitate him. There was

constant motion.

You know, they were -- it was just

constant motion in front of us. So, you

know, we fully expected to take him to

surgery.

Q. So you just stood against the wall

and watched these procedures being carried

out?

A. Yes, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

779

Q. Who else was attending besides

Dr. Rufus Brown and Dr. Julia at that time;

do you recall?

A. I can't necessarily recall the names

anymore. There was several doctors. I think

one in particular that -- I can't think of

his name -- was team leader. At the time it

wasn't any designated people. It was like

everyone was working together as groups, and

there wasn't anybody really -- they were all

talking back and forth and doing things, and

everybody was very involved in their work.

Q. Now, you just mentioned in passing

two men, male whites, with machine guns who

came running into the room --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- whom you saw. Did you recognize

who they were?

A. No, sir. I never seen them before.

Q. Did they identify themselves?

A. No, sir, they didn't.

Q. Did you ever see them again?

A. I don't recall because that night

was -- there were many men like that running

around sur -- I mean, in the emergency room

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

780

that night. When we got down there, they

were forming a ring around the walls which

was maybe -- they were a foot or two apart.

And there were officers, some wearing

T-shirts, some wearing suits, some wearing

uniforms, a variety of weapons. And they

formed a ring completely around the inside of

the back of the emergency room around the

wall.

I mean, all the way through the

other rooms. So it was totally secure at

that point. And we had heard also that they

were setting up flood lights at the hospital

because the hospital was receiving bomb

threats at that time.

Q. Were any of the people in the room

around the walls in the periphery in uniform?

A. Some were in uniform, yes, sir.

Q. What kind of uniforms?

A. City police, it seemed like Shelby

County. Some were just wearing, you know,

suits with their jackets off. Shoulder -- I

mean, guns, pistols. There was -- like I

said, there was a variety of weapons.

Q. What time did it become evident to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

781

you as an observer that Dr. King was dead?

A. Well, the activity continued. And

then I believe it was Dr. Julia or one of the

doctors -- several turned and walked up to

me. They -- I knew them -- quite familiar.

And they said, go get someone in charge. We

need to speak to someone in charge.

So I turned and went out of the room

and went out into the emergency room area

where I had noticed one or two gentlemen

wearing suits seemed to be more or less

telling everyone what to do. So I approached

them and told them that the doctor wanted to

speak to them.

So we walked back around the corner

into the emergency room. Right in the

doorway of Room 1 where the doors open, they

stood in the doorway, and the doctors

informed them of something to the effect of

Dr. King is -- Dr. King is terminated. We

have done everything that we can. We feel

there's nothing left that we can do.

And at that time the gentlemen in

suits told the doctors that they would like

for them not to make any statements to the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

782

press or do anything for about an hour

because they had to call out the National

Guard. And if they could go out of the area

very quietly or up the back steps or any way

they could get out, they would appreciate it.

Q. Who were the gentlemen in suits?

A. I do not know. I don't know what

their names were. I only had watched through

observation that they were -- they were

telling other people what to do, so I figured

they were in charge.

Q. Were they local people?

A. I do not know. I had never seen them

before or since.

Q. You've never seen them before or

since?

A. No, sir.

Q. They seemed to take charge of events

at that point?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Mr. Billings, moving on, many years

later --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- was there a time when you became

an investigator -- part of the investigative

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

783

team for James Earl Ray and his post-

conviction relief application?

A. Yes, sir, there was. I had -- I had

been working in Memphis a while. And I had a

particular client that was -- a high-profile

client needed some help on. And I requested

through an attorney, Sheldon Green, if he

knew an investigator that I could use that's

been around. So he mentioned Kenny Herman

who had been an investigator at that point, I

believe, 25 or 28 years.

So I met Kenny Herman, and we worked

on several cases over a period of a couple of

years. And during that period of time, he

talked about working for you, Dr. Pepper.

And we used to laugh about the attorney who

had a portable fax machine, because that was

a new thing back then, and he would ride the

train and take care of business on the fax.

And he talked about doing different

jobs. I believe Kenny became involved when

the BBC came over in the late 80's and did

several documentaries on this. And Kenny did

most of the research and looked up all these

witnesses and, literally, between you and he

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

784

pulled the case together. Which the BBC

aired several different shows that was put

together by you all.

Q. In the course of your work -- and

would you say your role grew with time as

that investigation continued?

A. Yes, sir, it did. We -- we sort of

discussed it a lot. Not that much because I

was under the impression that James Earl Ray

was the gunman, and what was the big

question. You know, what's the big deal? He

plead guilty. You know, I didn't understand

all the flurry of activity. And we would

talk about -- Kenny never pressed it

until -- at one point we were talking -- we

were doing surveillance one day. And he

showed me a contract, and it was -- he said

that I believe you and he had felt like it

would be very difficult for James Earl Ray to

ever get another real day in court.

And the idea was to possibly do a

mock trial which had been done previous to

this. And you felt that maybe through a mock

trial you could get some of this stuff out

and to the public.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

785

Q. So then you became involved in the

investigation --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- prior to the television mock

trial?

A. Yes, sir. We felt like that we as

investigators probably did the first

investigation that was ever fully done on

this case. And the people we talked to, we

found that that was probably true. That no

one as far as James Earl Ray, in the early

stages of his defense before he plead guilty,

had really adequately done an investigation

and touched all bases. And, of course, new

information had been released from the

government through their files that gave us

more insight into the case.

Q. Moving ahead from the -- the

television mock trial, did you become

involved at one point in the investigation

that focused on the existence of a man called

Raul?

A. Yes, sir, we did. Up until --

throughout our investigation leading up to

the mock trial, we discussed Raul. And we

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

786

had very little -- any -- no leads other than

James' statements to the effect that, of

course, Raul was the man he met at the

Neptune Bar in Canada by the docks -- the

maritime docks, and his descriptions of him

and his various associations with him,

traveling to Mexico, et cetera.

We all felt like ever finding

Raul -- and we, of course, thought maybe

that was just a code name, you know, or a

nickname or something. We weren't sure. So

we didn't hold forth a lot of hope. We

investigated as best we could, but we had

absolutely no leads.

Q. What did you understand -- according

to Mr. Ray, what did you understand was the

role that the alleged Raul played?

A. Well, according to James, the role

that he played was -- James, of course, was

on the run, looking for a way to get out of

the country and had made it into Canada. And

James typically, looking at his record, would

hang out in sort of seedy type bars and stuff

to try to make contacts with people who could

help him do things.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

787

And that was sort of his M.O. And

he said that he was in the bar one time and

he met a fellow named Raul. And they

started talking. And Raul -- he said -- he

described him as a Latin looking fellow. He

said that Raul offered to help him. He

said, I've got certain ways you can make some

money if you would just do certain jobs for

me, some of which included driving cars into

Canada and out of Canada.

I believe at this time James got

different sets of ID's. And James always

told me that he was just looking for a way to

get out of the country. He was trying to get

away because he was a fugitive.

Q. Do you recall the bar in which he

said he met Raul?

A. I believe it was the Neptune Bar.

Q. Where was it?

A. I want to say -- I can't recall right

now.

Q. All right.

A. But I do remember the Neptune Bar.

Q. Okay. So you're involved now with

the investigation of the existence of this

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

788

Raul, focusing on him.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did there come a time after the mock

trial when information came to you -- a

person came to you who had information about

such a person?

A. Yes, there was. Some months after

the trial, we sort of went -- when we won the

mock trial, we were all under the impression

that something was going to come of it. We

had raised a lot of issues. There had been a

lot of witnesses coming forth, and a lot of

witnesses that were not included in the

movie. The movie actually -- the trial

lasted, actually, around 79 hours. I spent

ten days with James in the prison passing

notes and stuff because he was not totally

familiar with that investigation. All of

this had happened very rapidly.

So James and I really -- you know, I

actually saw the entire 79 hours. They, of

course, tried to condense this into three

hours. And that's like trying to condense

this into three hours. I think it would be

very difficult.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

789

But some time after that a lady

named Glenda Grabow and Roy Grabow came from

Mississippi and contacted us and said that

they had some information for us. And Kenny

and I met with Glenda and Roy Grabow and

listened to what Glenda had to say.

Upon hearing her first statements

that we got into with her, I found it -- I

didn't necessarily believe her. I thought

this was too -- too incredible. And it's

also -- it was -- I mean, the things that she

told us -- you know, at that point I thought

possibly that the government or somebody had

put her in to try to further discredit us.

Because that was an ongoing thing during all

this period of time.

And -- but the more that we talked

with Glenda and the more information that we

got as investigators, we, of course, felt

like we were going to check it out. And me,

I was sort of in the course of mood to

disprove her. Because I said, this is --

this is -- I mean, either we're getting

one -- a great break, or this is just a

fictitious story.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

790

Of course, once we began to check

out her story, it began to fall into place.

And that was -- that was the amazing part of

it.

Q. What did you understand? What did

you come to believe happened with respect to

the existence of Raul? What new information

came to you from this source?

A. Well, she discussed her -- her story

was that she was a young girl whose family

had moved to Texas when she was probably 12,

13 years old -- had moved to Houston. And

while she was there, her family evidently was

in an abusive style with her. I believe that

was pretty much what it was. And she was --

she was hanging around the areas where she

lived.

And in this area she met a fellow

named Jack. And her -- she and Jack became

somewhat friends, I believe later intimate

friends maybe. And with this she had met

Raul -- a fellow named Raul. And when she

told us about Raul, she said, I don't know

his last name because his -- he always went

by the name Dago. She didn't know what

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

791

nationality he was other than he was

foreign.

And she had had -- she had come to

know this man and his uncle called Amaro.

And she got to know them, and I believe she

stated that she had made some pornographic

movies.

Q. Did this individual whom she

described as Raul, in many ways describing

him and talking about this against her own

interests, did -- at some point did this

individual -- did it become evident to her

that he had played some role in the

assassination of Martin Luther King?

A. Yes. She stated that -- she made it

clear to us that -- she said that she thought

he was involved in other things. But she --

this -- we asked her what -- why would she

think he was involved with this. And she

stated that it had been rumored among the

circle of people she was working with and

running with at that time that they were

involved in the King assassination.

And then there was an incident one

time that really seemed to stand out in her

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

792

mind and sort of hurt her, and it was very

painful for her to talk about. She stated

she was working one day. And she worked with

these people in various illegal activities

or, shall we say, shady activities. And they

sort of used her, I think, to do things for

them, run errands and stuff.

But she stated that they were

sitting at a table one day working on some

things. And Raul came in, and she was

looking through a little view finder -- a

little plastic thing, which she still had one

we looked through, and it was Martin Luther

King, Robert Kennedy and John Kennedy, and

there was a little picture of them.

And Raul, she said, came into the

room and said, what are you looking at? And

he evidently looked at it and went off about

it and told her that he had already killed

the -- I believe she referred to it as -- the

sonofabitch once, do I have to kill him

again? Or something to that effect. And

then drug her into a room and raped her.

Which was odd because they had had intimate

relations before, but it was very upsetting

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

793

to her and him.

Q. It was an act of violence against

her.

A. Yes.

Q. And a very traumatic experience for

her as you perceived it?

A. Yes. And Glenda was sort of damaged

goods. You know, she had been abused a good

bit of her life. And she has -- she doesn't

have the complexities to -- to fabricate an

elaborate complex story which is what she was

telling without losing a train of thought

which made it very credible to us.

Q. Has she from that day to this told

basically the same story?

A. Yes, she has.

Q. In terms of the details.

A. Yes. She's very good on the details

which, as an investigator, tells me it's --

it's hard to maintain a lie. The more

complex the lie, the harder it is to remember

the details, but --

Q. How long has -- has this story been

told by this person?

A. From the day we met her.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

794

Q. When was that in terms of years?

A. Probably nineteen ninety -- I want to

say maybe the fall of '93, '94, somewhere

around in there. Right after the movie.

Q. So for some six years the details

have been consistent?

A. Yes, they had. And we have talked to

her on many occasions. I've deliberately

brought things up to test her memory to see

if she can recall what I was talking about.

And she does. And to me that gives her the

credibility.

Q. Did there come a time when you

actually went to Houston along with others --

or even independent of others and checked out

some of the aspects of her story for

yourself?

A. Yes. We discussed among us at this

point -- it was Kenny Herman and I and then

Jack Saltman who was the director of HBO --

Tim's movie, who after making the movie

became very involved in this.

Q. And by "the movie" you mean what?

A. The trial of James Earl Ray.

Q. The trial, okay.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

795

A. And Mr. Saltman had been -- he sort

of -- when I first met him, he was

skeptical. It was just a job to him. And

once he had gone through and seen the 79

hours and the witnesses and heard all of

this, he was totally convinced that something

was wrong. And I believe Mr. Saltman felt

like he wanted to help get to the bottom of

this. So we discussed how can we find this

information out in Houston.

And myself -- I knew some people in

Miami and New York that I had worked for

through some of the years. And it -- being

an investigator, you meet a lot of different

people. And, anyhow, I asked him a favor, if

they could open some doors down in Houston.

And they made some phones calls.

These are some very, shall we say,

powerful people. And they made some phone

calls to a big bond company in Houston. And

the people at the bond company met with us

and opened the doors to people like retired

federal judges, people who owned theaters,

people who knew Glenda. Some of which said,

you know, yes, I -- I mean, all of them

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

796

admitted to knowing Glenda in somewhat of an

intimate way.

One of them even produced pictures

of her and gleefully said, these are

photographs I have of her. I keep them under

my bed, but I'm not going to show you the

good ones. Which stunned us. Everything she

said was becoming real.

Q. So you were able, in terms of your

own independent effort -- in the stint of

that, you were able to confirm a lot of the

details of her story.

A. Yes. And the more we checked, the

more it confirmed details. Which, you know,

it surprised me. Because I was the skeptic

of the group. I felt like this was just a

government plant. This just would really

disrupt the train. We did not want to get

into Texas. We did not want to get into any

of that. We were having trouble enough with

just the King assassination -- the various

resistance that we met through the press,

through the government, through --

Q. Moving on, did there come a time when

you were able to obtain harder information

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

797

with respect to the existence of this person?

A. Well, there was. We -- of course,

we -- we located Amaro because they had --

they had worked on the docks. He, I believe,

had a maritime card or something. And Jack

managed to pull his Director of BBC influence

out, and they gave him the information when

normally they wouldn't. He told them they

were making a movie and they needed this

information. So we obtained that. So we

knew there was an Amaro and we had the last

name and stuff, but we still didn't have

Raul.

Q. Did there come a critical break-

through at one point in time?

A. Yes.

Q. Right here actually in Memphis?

A. Yes, there was. Through our

investigation -- Kenny had been around a long

time and knew the police quite well and was

very good friends with, at that time, Sheriff

Jack Owens, I believe. So we had a lot of

influence. And Kenny asked a fellow to help

him. It was a lieutenant -- well, actually

at the time Sergeant Tim Cook came and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

798

produced a piece of paper that gave us a -- a

history of the Raul we were looking for that

led us to Portugal -- Lisben.

Q. Did this Memphis Police Department

officer not become a member of the Attorney

General's investigative task force on this

case?

A. Yes, he did. He sort of ran with us

for a couple of years -- or Kenny more than

myself. I met him a few times. And he was

trying to give information to Kenny. He gave

us that big plum and seemed very interested.

He was very, very interested in this case and

spent a lot of time with Kenny.

And as we broke into Raul, he was

sort of with us. And he began to meet with

us a good bit. And then when the Attorney

General's office ordered an investigation, he

was picked. He called us up and he was

ecstatic. And he said, you're not going to

believe what happened. They picked me. And,

of course, you know, we were saying, well,

that's great. We got somebody that we felt

was going to do an investigation -- you know,

a thorough investigation.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

799

And during this period of time we

would meet with him and he would tell us

various stories about the AG's -- Attorney

General's office and the problems they were

having. And he would always kind of degrade

them. And he would say things that I felt

that we wanted to hear. And I even mentioned

to Tim a number of times that I didn't

care -- there were several times I felt he

was even wearing a wire.

I told him -- I said, I don't care

if you wear a wire, I don't care if you're

reporting, I don't care what side you're on

because we're just after the truth.

Q. Did you come to believe that this

officer who had provided you with some useful

information at first had an ulterior motive?

A. I sort of thought that. Kenny and he

were friendlier. And Kenny, I think, spent

more time with him. But, once again, he was

a police officer. He had a job to do. And I

couldn't understand his enthusiasm for us

because generally people that got into this

or associated with us or helped us paid a

high price. And I felt like, you know, he

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

800

was jeopardizing his career.

Q. What then would have been the purpose

of giving you this information?

A. I felt like giving us this

information is like anything. If you want to

gain somebody's trust, you've got to give

them something. And he gave us something and

gained our trust through the fact that we

thought we could get more information from

him. And he had given us, you know, a

good piece.

Q. What was the nature of the

information that you were given early on?

A. Well, the information that we were

given was that Raul had worked in Lisben,

Portugal, up until 1961 at the arms factory

in Portugal making weapons. On this he was

supposed to be just a worker, but Tim noted

on the piece of paper that he had heard that

he was far more involved than just weapons

making. Actually, he was in the sale of

weapons.

And this, of course, went in with

what Glenda was saying and Roy, that they

were dealing weapons and would go out on the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

801

dock and pick up various fire arms, stuff

like that. So there were little -- you know,

there's a lot of little ties that seemed to,

you know, to add to her story. Now, I don't

think Tim knew all of this, so we were

getting it from two sources, so --

Q. Mr. Billings, I'm going to show you a

report and ask you if you recognize it.

A. This is the report that Tim Cook gave

us. It says: "Word of mouth is he really

wasn't an assistant mechanic, but rather a

clerk" --

Q. Let me --

A. I'm sorry.

Q. Let me back up one minute.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Let me ask you to read that report

but not to use the last name of the -- of the

person identified as Raul in that report.

A. Okay. It says: United States of

America, Number 8920111, Certificate of

Naturalization. DOB, date of birth,

7-16-34. Nationalized on 6-15 of '67 in the

name of Raul. Okay. It's signed by a

clerk in the Supreme Court of the State of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

802

New York.

Serial number from Portugal Passport

is 760529 issued on 12-5-61, expired 4-4-62.

Passport Number 18425/61 issued in Lisben,

Portugal, on 11-16 of '61, expires 11-15 of

'63. Worked from 10 of '57 through 12 of

'61 at National Factory of Arms in Lisben,

Portugal, as a mechanic assistant. Reason

for leaving, left for America. Correct name

of business is Fabrica Nacional Municoes

Armao -- and it goes on in Portugal.

Word of mouth is he really wasn't an

assistant mechanic but really a clerk who

worked in the office who did all the

paperwork on shipping arms. When arms were

shipped out, they were shipped out

unassembled. New York State Liquor Authority

wholesale beer license for that was effective

7-1 of '92, expires 6-30 of '93. Certificate

Number D240634.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you,

Mr. Billings. Move to admit, Your Honor.

THE COURT: That will be

marked.

(Whereupon said document was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

803

marked as Trial Exhibit Number 8.)

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Did there then come a

time, Mr. Billings, when you were provided

with a photograph of this individual which

you then -- which was then incorporated into

a spread?

A. Yes, sir. At this time also with

this piece of paper, Tim Cook gave us his

passport photograph from 1961 when he entered

America. So we did have a picture of him.

And that was the first photograph that we

had.

Q. Let me show you this spread of

photographs, please. Mr. Billings, can you

see those photographs quite clearly?

A. Yes, sir. That's a photo spread put

together by Kenny Herman and myself.

Q. Let me ask you if -- do you see the

photograph that you referred to as -- the

person referred to as Raul?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Which one is it?

A. It's the one on the right middle to

my right. You may want to point that out.

Q. You're saying this --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

804

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- this photograph here?

A. Yes, sir, that's the passport photo.

Q. And this was a photograph that you

received independently and incorporated it

into this spread?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did there come a time when you showed

that photograph to James Earl Ray in his

prison cell?

A. Yes, sir, it was. We -- when we had

a lot more information, we waited to discuss

this with James. I was visiting him quite a

bit at that time. And we discussed when and

how to show it to him. And we decided to go

ahead and see if he could pick it out. So we

went to River Bend Prison and met with James

and sat down at the table. And where I told

James -- I told him that we had a picture of

Raul. And he seemed somewhat surprised.

And I asked him if he would choose

to attempt to pick out Raul in a photo

spread. And he said that he would. So we

put this before him, and James put on his

glasses and very -- for a minute or two

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

805

studied these pictures very carefully. And

as he studied them, he looked down at them

and just kind of dropped his finger down and

said, that's Raul. And we said, are you

positive? He said, yes, I am.

And then he said something that

really surprised us. He said, I've seen this

picture before. And I asked James, I said,

what do you mean you've seen this picture

before? You know, I was thinking, how could

he have seen this picture before? And he

said during, I believe it was, the House

Assassinations Committee that someone had

mailed him, with a no-return address, a

picture. And it was this picture, and it had

a name on the back of it. And he couldn't

remember the name. And I asked him -- we

asked him, well, did anyone ever identify

this? He said, no, no one could identify

it.

I said, did anyone else ever see

it? And he said, well, my attorney. He said

he believed April Ferguson, who was also

working on his behalf, had seen it. And that

it was somewhat passed around among people at

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

806

House Assassinations, but no one could

identify this picture.

Q. Mr. Billings, let me -- your

testimony here today is that when you showed

this photograph to James Earl Ray, he said he

had seen it before?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Let me pass to you an affidavit

signed by James Earl Ray and filed in another

court on October 25, 1995. I ask you to

please read Paragraphs 8 and 9 of that

affidavit.

A. Okay. "In 1978, however, I did see a

photograph. And at that time I identified

the person in that photograph as being

Raul. In the intervening years I had

reviewed 200 to 300 photographs but was only

able to identify this particular one. I am

certain that the person in that particular

photograph identified was Raul. Attached

hereto as Exhibit 1, a copy of the newspaper

article which reported my identification at

that time.

"In the spring of 1995 I was shown

that same photograph of the man I know to be

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

807

Raul by Private Investigator Kenneth

Herman. At the time I confirmed that this

was the same photograph I had seen and

identified as depicting Raul. Mr. Herman

told me he believed he had located this man."

Q. That's fine. Thank you. Now, what

is attached to that affidavit?

A. It's James Earl Ray's signature

notarized.

Q. Is there a newspaper clipping

attached to that?

A. Yes, sir, there is.

Q. And --

A. It says something 30th, 1978. "Man

in photo is Raul. Ray."

Q. So that newspaper article is a report

on November 30, 1978, where James Earl Ray --

at which time James Earl Ray had been

reported as recognizing a photograph of a man

he called Raul?

A. Mm-hum.

Q. And to you he identified that

photograph as being the same as that one

there?

A. Yes, sir. Because he immediately

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

808

commented after picking him out that he had

seen this photograph before. And that was --

that was a real shock to us. I had not read

this newspaper article at that time.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor, move to

admit that affidavit and its exhibit.

THE COURT: Make that a

collective exhibit.

THE SHERIFF: Yes, sir.

(Whereupon said documents were

marked as Collective Trial Exhibit Number 9.)

THE COURT: Okay.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Has there been any

further activity on your part or the part of

your associates in the conduct of this

investigation of identifying Raul?

A. Yes, sir. Once we knew where he

lived, we went up and made surreptitious

photos of him on a cloudy rainy New York

Sunday when he was walking back from church.

He would walk down to the church in kind of

the square where he lived in and would walk

back up to his home.

And we had had someone stop him to

talk about some campaign literature in an

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

809

attempt to get some fingerprints from him,

which I believe we got six or seven prints

off of it. And we did that. And then we

went back another time -- we decided that

Glenda and Roy were unsure. They were

looking at the immigration photo which does

look a little bit different, which you would

expect.

So they were having a hard time with

that. And then they looked at the new photos

we had of the older Raul. And they

hadn't -- I believe it had been something

like 17 or 18 years or so since she had seen

him.

Q. Let me ask you: During this time

when you talked to Mr. and Mrs. Grabow,

did -- where did you meet them? Where were

they when these conversations took place?

A. Where were we meeting like here in

Memphis? We would meet them at Kenny's house

usually.

Q. So they were back here in Memphis.

A. Yes. They didn't want us to come to

their house because they were still at this

point trying to keep this low key. She

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

810

was -- they seemed very nervous about all of

this.

Q. Have you yourself ever been able to

speak personally with the man you've come to

identify as Raul?

A. Yes, I spoke to him a number of

times. We -- we decided -- Kenny and I

talked about it, and we decided that we

needed to try to get in to meet him and talk

to him. And, of course, we saw where he had

a liquor license. So we simply called him up

and started a conversation that we were

interested in opening up some pizza

businesses in New Jersey.

Q. Opening up some business operations?

A. Yes, some business operations.

Q. What I want to get to -- did you

notice how he spoke on the telephone?

A. Yes. He had an accent, but he spoke

very clearly. I mean, you could understand

him. He was very enthusiastic about us

coming to buy some wine from him. And we

discussed -- we called him three or four

times in the discussions.

Q. Did you know where he was ostensibly

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

811

employed during this whole period of time?

A. No, we did not know that.

Q. You did not know that at that time?

A. No. We were hoping to get into that

with him upon meeting him. And we went to

New York, and we took Glenda and Roy with

us. And we went to New York in an attempt to

get -- let Glenda and Roy visually see this

fellow.

So when we got there, I wanted to

try to set this up with -- since we had a

fairly good rapport going with Raul, I

wanted to set this up in a meeting. But

Kenny wanted to do what we kind of call a

cold call. And that means you just sort of

knock on the door. I guess he didn't want to

give him a lot of time to think about it. We

just wanted to come in there. So when we got

there, I phoned Raul from maybe ten minutes

from his house, an area he was familiar

with.

And we had set up cameras, video.

We had Glenda and Roy's position in place.

And I asked him to come pick me up. And he

seemed very shocked, very surprised and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

812

almost scared. It really threw me. I didn't

expect that kind of reaction because we had a

pretty good rapport. And he kept saying:

What are you doing? What are you doing

here? And I said, we discussed coming up.

And since we're here and looking at

locations, I said -- Kenny was posing as my

uncle. I said, my uncle was overdoing it.

And, you know, I rode over here today from

the area, and I thought I'd just go ahead and

talk to you and see about, you know,

purchasing -- setting up some purchases.

Q. He was put on his guard though at

that point.

A. Yes. And he kept saying, all I have

is Portuguese wine. And I said, that's fine

with us. And I said, well, can you come get

me? No, no. And he kept saying, I have to

go to the port. Well, that kind of threw

me. I thought he meant the airport. And he

kept saying, no, I've got to go to the port,

I got to go to the port. And I said, well,

do you want me to come up there? And he

said, no, I'm busy. I've got to go to the

port.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

813

And so we immediately went to his

house and set up surveillance. And this was

approximately -- maybe 11 in the morning.

And we stayed there until probably 1 or so at

night. And there was no movement there

whatsoever. I mean, it was like the whole

house shut down. He never went to the port.

Nobody ever left the house, nobody ever

came. Which we thought was rather odd. I

did anyway from the various cases I've

worked.

Q. When this became public, and it did

become public at one point in time, was there

a sudden movement or exit from his house?

A. Well, there was another time that I

went up with another fellow. And we were

going to try to get some pictures -- some

clearer pictures than the ones we had gotten

previously. And it was on Sunday morning.

And we got there early Sunday morning,

started doing some surveillance. And

during -- and just when we set up, a large

U-Haul type -- maybe Ryder rental truck

pulled up in the front of the house.

And three or four white males got

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

814

out, rather husky, and they looked around

like they were going to rob a bank. We

started laughing because they were looking up

and down the street and appeared to be

nervous. So we wondered, what's going on?

And they went into the house. And where they

stayed, they got some boxes out. We didn't

see anybody for a couple of hours, and then

they started bringing stuff out and loading

it into the truck.

So we watched them load the truck

over a period of two or three hours. And we

were debating about whether or not to attempt

to follow the truck. We knew if we did that,

you know, they might make us. And the fellow

I was with was not a detective and wasn't

skilled in surveillance, so we didn't want to

take a chance.

Q. So you didn't follow the truck?

A. No. And then the truck left late

that afternoon at which time, once dark came,

I went and picked up the garbage. Which is

something you do. It's not the cleanest of

jobs and stuff, but you go pick up people's

garbage. It's not against any laws. Once

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

815

you put it out, it's anybody's stuff. And we

went through the garbage trying to determine

what was going on at that time.

Q. Did you ever learn what was in the

boxes that were being removed from the house?

A. Well, we learned through the

garbage -- there was receipts there from a

lady who had lived in the house evidently for

a good period of time. They had like a

housekeeper or a friend that lived there. I

can't recall her name. And she had been

there, and she was planning on -- according

to the notes we found, she was planning on

moving within a few weeks. And for some

reason -- at that time we didn't know why, we

later found out why. For some reason she was

leaving that morning.

It looked like a really hasty thing,

that suddenly she decided to leave. Upon

leaving New York -- once we got back to

Memphis, we found out that that Sunday

morning the news in New York came out with an

article about Raul and, without giving the

last name or giving the address where he

lived, went through this whole story. So,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

816

evidently, they had read the morning paper,

and this woman decided that she was leaving.

That's what we determined.

Q. Did there come a time in your

knowledge that Mr. -- that this individual

was sued here in the City of Memphis in

another proceeding -- another civil

proceeding?

A. Yes, sir. I believe that was a

number of years ago. I believe it was a

civil suit that you and Mr. Chastain

brought. And he -- we were -- well, of

course, it's easy to say. But we figured,

well, surely if he's innocent, he will come

down here and testify and hire an attorney

and sue everybody. So that would be the

typical situation.

But he didn't want to come and

seemed to fight tooth and nail. And he had a

very, very expensive New York law firm in

Rockefeller Center that suddenly popped up to

represent him. And then he -- they obtained

the services of a law firm down here that

also defended him. And I -- of course, I

can't say what the cost is, but we're talking

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

817

months of litigation. And I believe the

hearings lasted several weeks. If memory

serves me, it lasted a long time.

So we would have to get into a very,

very, expensive, for the average citizen, to

afford these kinds of lawyers -- attorneys.

We later learned one of the questions we

pressed on, a lady who represented the Lisben

newspaper, the main newspaper in Lisben, we

met with her. She later went and met with

Raul and his family. I don't think she ever

really spoke with him. She spoke with his

daughter and his wife.

And one of her questions was how did

you afford these legal services. And their

answer was, well, the people at the church

liked Raul and felt sorry for him, so they

defended him. But the question to me is, I

guess, did the people in Memphis also like

him too -- enough to defend him for free.

And in my 30 years of experience,

I've seldom found attorneys who would defend

someone for free. Especially in a case like

that because you're talking hundreds and

hundreds of hours.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

818

Q. Did you attempt to do an income and

financial analysis of this gentleman's

background and status and position?

A. No, other than he owned -- owned some

property up there and had owned property for

some years. And he lived in a fairly nice

neighborhood and had a fairly nice home. So

he seemed somewhat -- you know, fairly

comfortable. But I -- I mean, I would be

scared to think what -- if I was in a similar

situation and hired a Rockefeller law firm

and a top law firm in Memphis to defend me in

such things, the cost would be a lot when it

would seem very simple to me to simply appear

and say, you know, I don't have anything to

do with this.

Q. Would your financial checks and the

information that you obtained indicate that

he could afford to pay for that -- those

kinds of --

A. No.

Q. -- legal services?

A. No. Not to the best of my belief he

couldn't. From my experience with lawyers

and trial cases and expenses, no.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

819

MR. PEPPER: Thank you,

Mr. Billings. Nothing further.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. You and I have talked about this case

for many years, haven't we?

A. Yes, sir, we have, Mr. Garrison.

Q. Let me ask you this. In all of your

conversations with Mr. Ray -- I know you had

many, many conversations with him -- did he

ever mention anything about Mr. Loyd Jowers

that you can ever remember?

A. He mentioned that he went -- I

believe he said he went into the grill that

morning and met Loyd Jowers, that he actually

talked to Loyd Jowers.

Q. Was that the only time that he ever

mentioned to you anything about Mr. Jowers?

A. He said that was his only meeting

with Mr. Jowers.

Q. Did you have any discussion with him

about what he and Mr. Jowers talked about?

A. No, other than -- I think he saw him

in there and they talked just in general. I

don't think he was fully aware of Mr. Jowers'

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

820

role in this.

Q. Ms. Grabow never heard of Mr. Jowers

when you talked to her, had she?

A. No.

MR. GARRISON: That's all, Your

Honor.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further,

Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right, sir.

You're free to leave. Thank you very much.

THE WITNESS: Thank you, Judge.

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: Let's take about ten

minutes.

(Brief break taken.)

THE COURT: Bring the jury out,

please, sir.

THE SHERIFF: Yes, sir.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: All right,

Mr. Pepper, we're ready.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you, Your

Honor. Plaintiffs call Mr. Royce Wilburn.

ROYCE WILBURN,

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

821

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Wilburn. Thank

you very much for coming down here this

afternoon and joining us. Would you state

your full name and address for the record,

please.

A. It's Royce Jeffrey Wilburn. And I --

what else did you ask?

Q. Your address.

A. What else did you ask me?

Q. Sorry.

A. Full name.

Q. Full name and your address, please.

A. I presently live in Nashville,

Tennessee.

Q. Mr. Wilburn, will you tell us what

you do for a living.

A. I'm a master electrician.

Q. How long have you been an

electrician?

A. 23 years.

Q. And do you have your own business or

are you employed?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

822

A. I had a business here in Memphis for

business there now.

Q. And is it your own business?

A. Yes. I'm an electrical

subcontractor, yes.

Q. And are you the brother of Glenda

Grabow?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And did you, as a young person, live

in Houston, Texas?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Do you -- can you tell us roughly how

long you lived in Houston?

A. About 1960 -- probably '61 until

probably about 1980.

Q. And as a young person living in

Houston, what was the neighborhood -- where

was the area where you lived?

A. It was near Hobby Airport. I don't

know if anybody knows where that's at.

Q. Near Hobby Airport?

A. It's near the south side of Houston

there.

Q. All right. Did you go to school in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

823

that area?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And how did you get to school?

A. A lot of times my sister would walk

with me to go to school. As I got a little

older, I'd take the school bus, you know.

You know, because we moved several times, and

it was a long ways, you know, to walk. So

I'd take the bus.

Q. Okay. Did you at that time and

during that time of your life become familiar

or come to know an individual known as -- now

known as Raul?

A. As -- at the time he was called

Dago.

Q. He was called Dago. And would you

describe how you came to know this person.

A. He used to follow my sister and I

around, you know, in his car. He was kind of

a dark-complected guy. I guess he talked

Spanish or some other -- you know, Houston

wasn't really integrated at that time.

That's why he kind of stood out to me, and I

was kind of scared of him. But he would pull

up and make us get in the car, things like

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

824

that.

And at one time had me lay down in

the back seat and put a hat over my head for,

you know, some reason. I don't know. Like

he didn't want me to know where he was

going.

Q. Made you lie down in the back seat

and he put a hat over your head?

A. Mm-hum.

Q. You remembered that vividly?

A. Oh, yes. Yes. I was scared to

death.

Q. And how often did you see -- did you

see this man?

A. Oh, probably ten, fifteen times. As

least as possible.

Q. Did he -- did he hang around a

particular area?

A. Yes. There was a small gas station

by a store my sister and I would walk to, and

she would mail letters to her husband. And

he would, you know, see us go by and he would

get in his car and follow us. I thought he

was an employee there. But now, come to find

out, I don't think he even worked there.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

825

Q. He just seemed to hang around there?

A. Just seemed to hang around, yes.

Q. What's the time frame when you

actually saw this person in years -- between

which years did you see him?

A. It was probably around the Kennedy

assassination -- '63, somewhere around in

there, '64, something like that, and probably

some after that.

Q. Did there come a time when he -- when

you didn't see him anymore, when he

disappeared?

A. Well, I got older and we moved, you

know, to a different neighborhood. And, of

course, my sister's husband -- you know, he

was in some rehabilitation center or

something at the time. And, you know, he got

out and they moved off, and I just -- we

moved to another neighborhood. And I never

really seen him again, but I knew some of his

family. Or my sister knew some of his family

that would come to their house.

Q. Which member or members of his family

did you know?

A. Let's see. Mondo (phonetic) I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

826

believe is his cousin or uncle. He visited

them quite often.

Q. You did see him quite often during

this time?

A. Probably twenty, thirty times.

Q. Did there come a time when I placed a

spread of photographs in front of you and

asked you to look at them?

A. Yes, sir, a couple years ago, I

think.

Q. And did you -- when that was done,

did you recognize one of the photographs --

one of the individuals in the spread?

A. Yes. One was this Dago/Raul

fellow.

Q. Let me show you these photographs.

Just take your time, please, Mr. Wilburn.

A. It would be on the right, the second

one down.

Q. Can we raise this so he can look at

the individuals on the bottom as well.

A. It's kind of a bad picture, but that

is him.

Q. Which one are you saying is the one

you recognize?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

827

A. On the right, second one down.

Q. On the right, second one down?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. This one here?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. Do you have any question that's the

man you saw in Houston, Texas?

A. No doubt about it unless he's got a

twin brother.

Q. No question at all that that is the

same person?

A. Nope. No question at all.

MR. PEPPER: Now, Your Honor, at

this time plaintiffs will move the admission

of this spread of photographs.

(Whereupon said document was

marked as Trial Exhibit Number 10.)

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Now, at one point,

Mr. Wilburn, your sister, Mrs. Grabow, will

be testifying before this Court, probably out

of order because she's not been well

recently. But have you -- let me ask you:

Have you discussed this identification that

you have given us with her?

A. No, not at all. Huh-uh.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

828

Q. This is your own independent

recollection and identification?

A. Right. Right. Yes, I was asked

to -- you know, by you, and there was

somebody else, I don't know who it was, that

come to my house and asked me could I

identify this Dago/Raul guy. And I said, if

you've got a picture of him, you know, I

can. They threw 15 or 20 pictures down

there. And I said, that's him. And they

said, you know, yes, it is.

Q. All right. Thank you. Now I'm going

to ask you to look at this affidavit,

Mr. Wilburn. Would you just please just look

through it.

A. Yes, this is the one I --

Q. Do you remember giving that

affidavit?

A. Yes, sir, I do.

Q. Would you just look at the last

page.

A. What, the photos or the --

Q. Not the photos but the last page of

the affidavit, the signature page. Is that

your signature?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

829

A. Well, the very, very last page

doesn't have mine on it. It's this one here.

Q. Yes, the signature page.

A. Yes. Okay. Yes.

Q. Now, would you look at the photograph

which is an exhibit to it. And next to

the -- somewhere on that photograph do you

see your initials?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you place your initials there?

A. Yes, sir.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you.

Plaintiffs move the admission of

Mr. Wilburn's previous affidavit.

(Whereupon said document was

marked as Trial Exhibit Number 11.)

MR. PEPPER: Mr. Wilburn, thank

you very much. No further questions. It's

Mr. Garrison's turn.

THE WITNESS: Oh, okay. I was

kind of nervous. Ready to go.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. I'm sorry, I did not get your full

name.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

830

A. Royce Wilburn.

Q. Mr. Wilburn, what years are we

looking at that you met this gentleman that

you've identified? '61, 2, 3?

A. I would say -- like I say, it was

right around the time, you know, Kennedy was

assassinated.

Q. '63?

A. Yes. This guy, he hung out, you

know, right down the street from Hobby

Airport where Kennedy would get on the plane,

and then he went to Dallas and got

assassinated, but --

Q. Did he appear to have a job where he

was working anywhere?

A. I thought he worked at that gas

station.

Q. You never heard -- you heard him

engage in conversation, I guess; did you

not? This gentleman, you heard him talking

to someone; am I correct, sir?

A. Yes, he talked to my sister while we

was in the car.

Q. You heard the conversations?

A. Yes, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

831

Q. You never heard him mention anything

about the name of Jowers, I don't suppose.

A. Yes, sir, I do.

Q. Have you ever heard your sister

mention anything about the name Mr. Jowers?

A. I've heard it mentioned, but I really

don't know who the person is or anything.

You know, I think he lives in Memphis.

MR. GARRISON: That's all.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further,

Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right. Now you

may stand down.

THE WITNESS: Can I really leave

this time?

(Witness excused.)

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiffs have an apparently lengthy video

deposition -- video/audio deposition, and it

probably would be appropriate to begin that

after lunch.

THE COURT: Okay.

MR. PEPPER: Unless you want us

to -- I estimate it will take 30, 35, maybe

40 minutes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

832

THE COURT: That's the length of

the deposition?

MR. PEPPER: That's the length

of the -- it was a telephonic/audio

deposition, yes.

THE COURT: Okay. If that's

what it's going to be, 35 or 40 minutes -- is

that about right? It's going to take about

35 or 40 minutes. All right.

MR. PEPPER: Go ahead? Your

Honor, the deposition is of a Yorkshireman --

it's an Englishman who lives in Yorkshire --

west Yorkshire to be exact. And since the

speech is not always readily recognizable and

distinct as possible, the plaintiffs have

prepared a transcribed copy for each member

of the jury and for the Court. With your

permission, we would like to have these

passed out.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, I

have no objection. I requested the

deposition, in fact.

THE COURT: All right. Are

there any members of the press present?

MR. PEPPER: Sorry. Excuse me.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

833

THE COURT: I was asking if

there were any members of the press present.

I was going to let them have one. All

right.

(They following is a transcript

of the video deposition of Mr. Sidney J.

Carthew that was played in open court.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

834

VIDEOGRAPHER: This is the

videotaped deposition of Mr. Sidney J.

Carthew. It's being taken by the plaintiffs

in the matter of King versus Jowers in the

Circuit Court of Tennessee for the Thirtieth

Judicial District at Memphis.

Mr. Carthew is with us via

telephone. It's being held in the offices of

Daniel, Dillinger, Dominski in Memphis,

Tennessee on November 5, 1999, beginning at

approximately 2:39 p.m.

The court reporter is Kristin

Peterson with the firm of Daniel, Dillinger,

Dominski in Memphis. The videotape

specialist is Ted Schurch with the Data

Company in Memphis.

Will counsel now please introduce

themselves.

DR. PEPPER: William Pepper for

the plaintiffs in this action.

MR. GARRISON: Lewis Garrison

for defendant, Jowers.

VIDEOGRAPHER: Do you have any

announcements or stipulations you'd like to

put on the record?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

835

DR. PEPPER: None for the

plaintiffs.

MR. GARRISON: None for the

defendant.

VIDEOGRAPHER: If the reporter

will please swear in the witness, we'll go on

the record.

SIDNEY J. CARTHEW,

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY DR. PEPPER:

Q. Sid?

A. Is that for me?

Q. Yeah. That's for you, Sid.

A. Yeah, I do.

Q. Okay. Sid --

A. The sound isn't too good, but carry

on.

Q. Okay. If you have trouble hearing

any of the questions, please ask, and I'll --

I will repeat them.

A. Okay.

Q. Sid, you were a merchant seaman in

the British Merchant Navy; is that --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

836

A. Yes.

Q. -- that right?

A. Yes.

Q. And do you recall the years that you

were a merchant seaman?

A. From 1956 until 1973.

Q. Right. And where would you go?

Where would your duties and your sailing

obligations take you as a seaman during that

period of time?

A. All over. All over the world.

Q. Right. Did you sail the North

Atlantic route frequently?

A. Yes, quite often.

Q. Right. Now --

A. Pardon?

Q. That's okay. That's fine. Now --

A. Yeah.

Q. -- do you recall, Sid, in -- in 1967

sailing from Liverpool to Montreal?

A. Yes.

Q. I don't expect you, naturally, to

remember the name of the ship because you

sailed on many different ships, didn't you?

A. It was a ship -- Canadian Pacific

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

837

Line. I think it was the Empress of

Britain. There was two ships that were

exactly the same and on the same run, and it

was the Empress of England, Empress of

Britain. They were two weeks apart in

sailing dates.

Q. Right. Now, when you -- when you

sailed from Liverpool to Montreal and landed

in Montreal, how long would you stay in that

city, and how long in that -- well, let me

rephrase that. How long did you stay in that

city on that -- on that particular time?

A. One week.

Q. You stayed there for one week?

A. On every trip, it's one week in

Montreal, one week at sea, and then one week

in Liverpool.

Q. Right.

A. But it's a week in Liverpool, one

week at sea, one week staying in Montreal,

and then, again, one week at sea. So it's

one month all total -- that's sailing and

docking.

Q. Right. Okay. Now, when you stayed

in Montreal, was there a particular bar or

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

838

restaurant that you frequented on a regular

basis?

A. Yes. The Neptune Bar and also the

Seaman's Mission on the same street. I think

they call it Commerce Street.

Q. Was it West --

A. It was near the ship.

Q. Yeah, West Commissioners.

A. It was right near the port where we

docked. And that was the first bar we got to

was the Neptune Bar. It was the one that

most seamen frequented.

Q. Right. Did you -- were you known to

people who regularly frequented the bar?

A. Only two other seamen. Two other

seamen -- seamen that frequently went in

Montreal as their home port. One or two of

them knew me, but mostly it was strangers.

Q. Right.

A. At the time that we're talking about,

there was a lot of activity going on because

I think there was some kind of world games

there because there was an awful lot of

people in and around Montreal in general.

Q. Around this point in time?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

839

A. Yes.

Q. That was the year of the

International Youth Festival. It was -- it

was held in Montreal in the late summer,

early autumn of 1967. Could that have been

the event you are talking about?

A. Well, I don't know if that was it,

but -- but the -- the all of Montreal was a

height of activity with these international

games.

Q. Right. Okay.

A. The ship may have got in during the

games, so the -- I mean, international games

would be of little importance to a merchant

seaman, I'm afraid.

Q. Right. Sid, where did you sleep in

the evenings after you left the Neptune Bar?

A. Well, I mean, if you had any female

company, you would obviously stay ashore, but

most nights -- I would say that most nights,

back on the ship.

Q. Right. Now, toward the end of this

stay in Montreal, did you meet a fellow in

the bar, in the Neptune Bar, whom we have

come to know as Raul?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

840

A. Yes. Yes.

Q. Could you describe that encounter,

Sid.

A. What? The conversation?

Q. Well, yeah, how you met him. Just

right from the beginning, how it all

started.

A. Well, at first, I -- I met a person

who I now think was James Earl Ray because

they were both standing at the bar together,

and the shorter one of the two, he was very

quietly spoken, and he asked me about going

on a ship to possibly work his passage.

And I explained to him that he

couldn't possibly do that in this modern day

and age -- even though I'm talking about

nearly thirty years ago, twenty-odd years

ago -- the -- the situation -- that he wasn't

able to do that, and I explained it to him.

And then he said that he would like

to get hold of a seaman's discharge book, and

I explained to him again that the discharge

books -- when you sign on the ship in your

home fort, you hand the discharge book into

the ship. So you don't get it back until you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

841

return to the port.

And the books that he had seen

previously, obviously from other seamen, were

identity books, and I told him that there are

fingerprints -- they put your fingerprints

in, so if anybody was to -- if they wanted

to, they could try it by changing a

photograph. He may be able to do that, but

he couldn't change the fingerprints.

So that was the end of that

conversation. He went back to the bar, and,

in fact, I thought he was an off-duty bar

tender because he was dressed in a white

shirt, black tie. He spoke to the taller

one, who was slightly of a Spanish look, but

he didn't have black hair. He had brown

hair, darkish brown hair. He came over and

introduced himself to me and a couple of

friends that I was with.

Q. Now, Sid, let me just interrupt you

here. You think the first conversation you

had may well have been with James Earl Ray?

A. It may well have been, but I never

even saw any photographs, pictures on

television of him. It was only when I saw

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

842

him on the mock trial that was on television

that I recognized it then that he -- he was a

bit fatter then obviously. I mean, when I

seen him on television recently, the poor man

was a shadow of his former self I should

imagine.

Q. Right. Okay. So you think it may

have been James Earl Ray who was asking you

about getting some papers to get out of North

America and get on a ship?

A. Yeah.

Q. Okay. And -- and you had this

discussion with him. Then you went back and

sat down, and -- and this other man came over

with a brownish sort of hair; is that right?

A. Yeah.

Q. And --

A. He was asking me the same kind of

thing. I think he was just trying to get

confirmation for the first person, you know,

to try and figure out whether it was

possible, and I proved to him that it's been

done many, many times where seamen had took

other seamen, who maybe have jumped ship in

Montreal, and they took them back on the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

843

ship, and they sailed back to Liverpool and

kept away from the Master Arms in -- on the

ship for a week.

It -- it was done on a more or less

regular basis, and I said that if this friend

of his -- he could take that chance. He

could go aboard the ship with -- make friends

with seamen, and especially if he had

relatives in England, I mean, they would've

helped him to get back to England, but he

didn't sound English, obviously, and if he

had done that, he would have needed it to

avoid ejection on the ship on certain days.

And this person introduced himself

to me, this Raul. He said, well, that's

seven chances of getting caught, and I said,

well, that's true. If you want to look at it

that way, it's seven chances of getting

caught. With a lot of hindsight, I didn't

know how -- why he needed to leave Montreal,

and, you know, the length he was willing to

go to to get away.

Q. I understand that.

A. Yeah.

Q. Sid, the man who introduced himself

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

844

to you, he introduced him -- what name did he

give you?

A. He actually gave me that name --

Raul.

Q. He introduced himself to you as Raul?

A. Yes. Yes.

Q. Right.

A. And it's only -- it's only when I was

watching the tape, the recording, of the mock

trial. I didn't look at it but a couple of

months after that maybe because I put it on

the shelf and forgot about it, and when I did

see it, part of it was -- my daughter had

taped something else, and when I put it in

the television, it came up on the court scene

where the prosecutor was ridiculing James

Earl Ray and saying that this Raul was a

figment of his imagination, and I called my

daughter in the room and said, look, no, this

isn't a figment or lie. I said, this poor

man is telling the truth, and that is when I

decided to try and locate you, which it took

me a long time to do.

Q. Yes, I understand that, and you

really persevered, Sid, and I --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

845

A. I phoned the U.S. Embassy to ask them

who was defending James Earl Ray, but they

didn't tell me. They said they didn't know,

and I asked several things, you know. I was

being put to one department to another in the

Embassy, but they didn't know, however, so I

eventually found out by going to the

Citizen's Advice Bureau that put me in touch

with the bar, the lawyer's bar, and the rest

is, as they say, history.

Q. Yes.

A. Left it to you, and that was it.

Q. That's right. Thank you. Thank you

very much for your -- for your perseverance.

Now, Sid, what -- did you have other

conversation with this man, Raul, at that

point in time?

A. Yes. The lad that -- the lad that I

was talking to, and I met him over a period

of, what, say three years -- he sailed out of

Montreal. He sailed on Canadian ships, but

he was talking about the election with George

Wallace, and at -- at some point in the

conversation, things became a bit heated, you

know, as things do when you are talking

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

846

politics, and I think that this Raul thought

that we were Irish because the other lad

spoke slightly different to me.

I'm from Liverpool, but,

unfortunately, a lot of people can't make the

difference out between Liverpool and the

Irish because there is a big Irish population

in Liverpool, and I think he thought that we

were Irish Nationalists, you know, connected

to the -- possibly the IRA. He didn't say

that. He didn't say that, but the

conversation came down, and I -- at one point

I said, I believe in the rights of the people

to bear arms, and I'm sure that you'll

understand this being an American.

As I've said on many occasions that

the people -- I live in what the -- is

largely called a democracy, but the head of

our country is home elected, and if it ever

came to conflict, you know, the only people

that would have the right to bear arms in

defense of themselves would be criminals and

the police, and he said he would be able to

get some guns.

Q. He said he would be --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

847

A. I remember it quite clearly because I

said to him, well, I don't want any of that

Second World War rubbish, you know, rusting

rubbish, and he said these are brand new,

Army issued, nine millimeter. He said they

were Browning nine millimeters, Army issued,

and they are new.

Q. Now, he --

A. And another thing why I remember

it -- because although it sounds funny, it

wasn't. He said to me, how many would you

want, and I said four. And he said, how, you

know, how are you going to get them on the

ship, and I said that I would get them on the

ship, just put them in a shopping bag or even

in the waistband of mu trousers and take

them, and he said, four, what do you -- four,

what do you mean by four. I said four guns.

He wanted to sell me four boxes of guns.

He said that he -- once he knew that

I would have only take -- took four, he was

very annoyed, and he said that there was a

Master Sergeant in the Army -- he wanted his

cut out of this, you know, and it wouldn't be

worth his while to deal in such a small

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

848

number, and that was the end of that

conversation, and he went back to the bar.

Q. Right. Now, Sid, did you have

this -- all this conversation with him in

this one evening, or was this over a period

of two evenings?

A. Of two -- two evenings, yeah.

Q. Yeah. And the conversation about the

guns, did that take place -- which evening

did that take place on?

A. I think that was the first -- the

first evening, yeah.

Q. So, you -- you and -- and --

A. It was at the same time when -- who I

now think -- but it may not have been James

Earl Ray, but, you know, it looks more to me

as if it was. That was the -- but that was

the same evening when he came over because he

made it his business to come over and talk to

me, and this friend of mine that was stuck at

the table as if he was taking charge of what

the first person was saying, you know. And

looking at it now from the point of view of

the mock trial on television, I can see now

why he wanted to prove to the first man that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

849

it was no good going by ship.

Q. Well, because he might have had other

plans for -- for James?

A. Right, if he did.

Q. Right. So, Sid, after you had this

discussion with this man over two

evenings --

A. Yeah.

Q. -- did you ever see him again at the

Neptune?

A. No. No. We sailed shortly after

that.

Q. Right. And you never -- and you

never again saw him on any successive visits

to the Neptune?

A. No. No. Nor the first man either.

Q. Right. Now, Sid, do you recall that

when you did locate me and when we did meet

up that you gave me and executed for me an

affidavit?

A. Yes.

Q. And I'm looking at that affidavit

now. You don't have a copy of it there, do

you?

A. No. No.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

850

Q. The date of it is the 23rd day of

January, 1997, and you've executed this

affidavit in West Yorkshire before

J. Brearley and Company?

A. That's right, yes.

Q. And do you know where they are

located?

A. What? The solicitors?

Q. Yes.

A. They're here in Elland where I live.

Q. And on which street, do you recall?

A. Small town where I live.

Q. Yes, but do you --

A. On Burley Street.

Q. Okay. I just wanted you to confirm

that for the record because that is -- that

is what the affidavit reads; that they are J.

Brearely and Company Solicitors on Burley

Street in Elland, West Yorkshire.

Do you recall at that time that I

showed you a spread of photographs of six

different people?

A. Yes.

Q. And did you identify one of those six

people as being Raul?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

851

A. Yes, that's right.

Q. And do you recall those -- how those

photographs were arranged on the page?

A. What? How they were arranged on the

page?

Q. How the photographs were depicted on

the page, yes, how they were arranged. Do

you recall that?

A. I think there was three on the top,

three on the bottom, or maybe two -- two sets

of two.

Q. Three -- three --

A. It's such a while back, you see.

Q. Yes. It is a long time ago. There

were six photographs.

A. Yes, that's right.

Q. And they were arranged in -- in three

sets of two -- top, middle and bottom.

A. Yeah.

Q. It's very difficult for you to

recall, but do you remember where the

photograph of Raul was listed -- was depicted

on that page?

A. Yeah. It was on the bottom to the

right. And, you know, if people say -- would

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

852

say how could I pick someone out after all

those years, it's very, very unusual to find

someone of Spanish or even slightly Spanish

with brown hair. I was at sea for many, many

years, and believe me, it's a very small

minority of people. That's what made me

recognize him.

Q. When you saw that photograph of Raul,

did you -- did you know beyond any question

of a doubt that this was the person you met

in the Neptune?

A. Well, unless he's got a twin brother,

that was him.

Q. You are certain that was Raul?

A. Yes.

Q. And do you remember affixing your

initials on the photograph that you have

depicted as being Raul?

A. Yes.

Q. Because I'm looking at the spread of

photographs, and there is a -- there is your

initials and then I think also the initials

of the swearing solicitor.

A. Yes, that's right. Yes.

Q. Okay. I'm going to put this

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

853

affidavit of yours and the exhibits attached

to it, one of which is the exhibit of the

spread of photographs with your initials on

them -- one that you've identified as Raul --

into evidence as a part of this deposition,

Sid.

A. Yes.

DR. PEPPER: Plaintiffs' 1.

(Whereupon, documents were marked

collectively as Plaintiffs' Exhibit 1.)

Q. Now, I have really nothing further,

just to say at the conclusion at this point

that I want to thank you for -- one, for

coming forward initially. I know it was very

difficult for you to locate me, and, two, for

thanking you for giving the deposition

today.

And I think for the record, Sid, you

should just briefly tell us what has happened

to you following your coming forward and my

writing about your story in the -- in the

book that I published on this case.

A. Oh, well, the journalists have been

writing in the main saying how I'm a Nazi.

This is even after being a person who's been

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

854

with the National Union of Seamen defending

seamen's rights and pay -- called me a Nazi.

And on the other hand, any people of mixed

race -- you know, I'm getting the accusations

from both sides, so I'm in the middle. I'm

getting it from left and right, and my house

was petro bombed, and I believe that that was

through an article called Search Right that

is distributed to not only trade unionists,

but what they call fascists. I've never been

a fascist in my life.

Q. You've been -- you've been really

what is termed a nationalist in terms of

Britain --

A. Oh, yes. I'm a nationalist, yeah.

Hard to be an Englishman.

Q. Right. And that has been picked up

and twisted and distorted, and as a result of

your coming out here in support of an action

on behalf of James Earl Ray. That seems to

have been turned into a pretty difficult -- a

difficult time for you.

A. Oh, yes. Not only me, my daughter as

well. I mean, when the petro bombs were

thrown at the house, it was closest to 2:00

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

855

in the morning, and my house is what we call

here a back-to-back. There is only a front

way in and out. There is no back way in or

out. We could have been burned to death.

You know, it's a -- and

unfortunately, the -- you may have the same

kind of journalists in America. They don't

let the truth stand in the way of a good

story, and it -- and it sounds a lot better

if you can call the person either a Nazi or a

fascist. It sounds good, but it's --

Q. Right. Well, it's -- Sid, do you

have any reason to believe that there are any

official agencies of government behind these

acts, or do you think this is -- all of this

is simply spontaneous on the part of

hate-mongering people?

A. Well, I -- I don't feel that -- I

don't know much about that kind of thing, but

I do know that anybody who writes in

magazines and -- destroying their living and

helping to try to destroy their lives, I

don't see how they could possibly get away

with it unless it was being state protected.

Q. Has anyone been arrested for the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

856

petro bombing?

A. No. Even when the police came to the

house, the journey that they told me that

they came from would take less than five

minutes, and it took twenty minutes for them

to get here, and, again, you know, there is a

lot of things that people might think is

rather funny, but I don't, is that they said

that the local patrol car were on their tea

break.

Q. They were on their tea break?

A. Yeah. So, you know, if that doesn't

sound funny, I don't know what does.

Q. So they were delayed in answering a

call for a petro bombing.

A. That's right.

DR. PEPPER: All right, Sid.

Well, I wanted that on the record as well

because I think you've shown a great deal of

courage in coming forward, and, again, I'm

grateful for you for doing so.

Now, I have nothing forward, and

Mr. Lewis Garrison may have some questions,

and he will put them to you.

Thank you very much.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

857

THE WITNESS: All right.

DR. PEPPER: Nothing more.

MR. GARRISON: No, I have

nothing, Mr. Carthew, to ask you. We

appreciate your time.

VIDEOGRAPHER: Okay. This is

the end of the videotaped deposition of

Mr. Sidney J. Carthew, November 5, 1999,

approximately 3:07 p.m.

(End of the video deposition of

Mr. Sidney J. Carthew.)

THE COURT: Pass them from one

end to the other, please. And those people

of the press that had them, would you just

hand them back over to the attorney.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiffs move admission of Mr. Carthew's

affidavit which was cited in the course of

the deposition.

THE COURT: All right.

MR. PEPPER: Which includes the

exhibit -- the photograph that he initialed.

(Whereupon said document was

marked as Trial Exhibit Number 12.)

THE COURT: All right. Now

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

858

we'll break for lunch and we'll resume at

about 2:30.

(Lunch recess.)

THE COURT: Are we ready for the

jury? Bring them out.

THE SHERIFF: Yes, sir.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: All right.

Mr. Pepper, call your next witness.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you, Your

Honor. Plaintiffs call Mr. J.B. Hodges, Your

Honor.

JOE B. HODGES,

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Hodges.

A. Good afternoon, Dr. Pepper.

Q. Thank you very much for coming all

the way down here to give your testimony. We

appreciate it.

A. Okay.

Q. Would you please state your full name

and address for the record, please.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

859

A. Joe B. Hodges, 174 Dillon Road,

Mickey, Tennessee.

Q. Thank you. And, Mr. Hodges, what do

you do now?

A. I'm retired from the police

department, yes, sir.

Q. And how long did you serve on the

police department?

A. 25 years.

Q. And what was your capacity? What

role -- position did you have on the police

department?

A. For a couple of years I was assigned

to a car. The last 23 years I was assigned

to the dog squad.

Q. And were you assigned to the dog

squad in 1968?

A. Yes, sir, I was.

Q. Were you assigned to the dog squad at

the time of the assassination?

A. Yes, sir, I was.

Q. And where were you on the afternoon

of the assassination?

A. Myself and two other officers was at

a restaurant at the intersection of Crump and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

860

Third Street.

Q. And how did you receive word that

Dr. King had been shot?

A. It came over the car radio.

Q. What did you do when you heard that

announcement?

A. We both -- well, all three of us

proceeded back to the car and got in and went

to the scene where the call was at. The

dispatcher at the time he put out the

information advised all cars in the area to

move into that area.

Q. So your instructions were to pull

into that immediate area?

A. Right. Yes, sir.

Q. And did you pull into that area?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And how did you arrive into the area?

A. We came down north on Main Street in

front of the hotel and then down -- I've

forgotten the street. It's just north of

there. But, anyway, back up in front of the

Lorraine Motel and parked there.

Q. In front of the Lorraine Motel?

A. Yes, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

861

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor, may I

show this to the witness?

THE COURT: You may, yes.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Mr. Hodges, can you

see this graphic drawing?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, there's Butler Avenue on one

side and Huling on the other.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Mulberry and South Main. Which route

did you take to come into the area?

A. I would have came in on South Main to

Huling Avenue, east on Huling and then south

on Mulberry Street.

Q. You turned right on Mulberry and went

south?

A. Right.

Q. And where did you park your car?

A. Just about -- I guess right at the

edge of the dark green area just to the --

right along in there somewhere where the

squad car was parked.

Q. Right here on the west side of

Mulberry?

A. Right. Yes, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

862

Q. How long was this after the shooting?

A. Whatever time it would take me

from -- to get -- that length from the

Third -- Third and Crump area to there.

Q. Could you estimate that for the

jury. They're not necessarily familiar.

A. Five minutes maybe. I don't know if

it took that long. Maybe three. It's not

that far up there. It's just a short

distance up there.

Q. Maybe even three minutes?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Very quickly.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And you came in north on South

Main --

A. Right.

Q. -- made this right turn on Huling.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Now, when you made the right turn on

Huling, were you going at a pretty fast clip?

A. But at that -- at the time we got to

the -- probably about where the fire station

is, we had slowed down because we was kind

of -- to observe, you know, anything --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

863

anybody that might be running in the area or

anything like that. But we were still moving

on to that area. But we was more alert to

our surroundings is what we were.

Q. Okay. Now, did you see anybody or

any cars moving quickly on South Main?

A. No, sir, we did not.

Q. Did you see any pedestrians on the

sidewalk that came to your attention?

A. Not that I recall, no, sir.

Q. As you turned the corner at Huling

and went down Huling -- east on Huling, did

you see any movement at all?

A. No, sir, not that I recall.

Q. Not at that time?

A. No, sir.

Q. Did you notice any cars parked there

at all?

A. On Huling?

Q. Yes.

A. No, sir, I don't recall whether there

was any or not. I don't know to be honest

with you.

Q. That's fair enough. And then you

turned onto Mulberry. Now, at the time you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

864

arrived, had they set up barricades yet here?

A. No, sir, they hadn't.

Q. So they hadn't -- the police had not

yet arrived to block off Mulberry.

A. No, sir.

Q. Because they did block off Mulberry

on both ends; did they not?

A. No, sir, they were not blocked when

we arrived on the scene.

Q. So you were able to proceed unimpeded

in through here.

A. Right.

Q. To this spot here?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, when you turned onto Mulberry,

did you notice any movement on the street?

A. No, sir, none other than police

officers was all I had seen.

Q. You saw some -- and where did you see

the police officers?

A. There was some in front of the -- on

the east side of the street and also a few

officers on the west side of the street

there.

Q. Were there some officers --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

865

A. In that general area right in there.

Q. In and around this area here?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you notice any firemen?

A. No, sir, not right offhand. I don't

recall seeing any.

Q. And you didn't -- did you notice

anybody on this sidewalk here?

A. Could have been some police

officers. They was -- I believe there was

some police officers on the sidewalk at that

time.

Q. Okay. So you parked your car right

around here.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. What kind of car were you driving?

A. A black -- I believe it was a '67

Ford. I'm not sure in that squad car -- a

regular squad car.

Q. And what was the color of the regular

squad car?

A. It was black -- solid black all over.

Q. Solid black?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Is there a difference in the color

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

866

between the squad cars and the traffic cars?

A. Yes, sir. The traffic cars were

white, best I remember, during that time.

Q. So the Memphis Police Department

traffic cars were white and the regular squad

cars were black.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Now, were you alone in your squad

car?

A. No, sir, there was two other officers

with me.

Q. Who were those officers?

A. J.D. Hodges, and I don't recall the

other officer's name.

Q. You don't remember his name.

A. There was two rookie officers that

was just out of the police academy.

Q. Where was Patrolman Torrence

Landers? Do you recall him?

A. Yes, sir. I knew -- I knew Officer

Landers. At the time I arrived on the

scene?

Q. Yes.

A. I believe that we had already -- was

up and behind the building there behind the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

867

hotel when I ran into him. I believe that

was the first time that I had ran into him.

Q. So you didn't see him when you were

in this --

A. No, sir, I don't recall seeing him

down on the street. No, sir.

Q. Now, you exited your vehicle.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And when you exited your vehicle, did

you look around and see what was going on?

A. More or less just looking for a

commanding officer. Because on a scene,

normally you report to the officer on command

and the officer on the scene so he could

assign to you wherever he wanted -- whatever

he wanted you to do.

Q. Did you find the commanding officer?

A. Yes, sir, we did.

Q. And who was the commanding officer?

A. Lieutenant Cochran.

Q. Lieutenant Cochran?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. He was there ahead of you?

A. Yes, sir, I believe he was assigned

to homicide at that time.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

868

Q. So he would have worked under

Inspector Eddie Zachary?

A. Yes, sir, he would have.

Q. And what did Lieutenant Cochran

instruct you to do?

A. Well, he instructed us to go up to

behind the building area there. And I don't

know what he told the other officers. But to

me -- he wanted me -- he took a measurement

there. No, excuse me. We went up and just

looked in the general area around the

building there to start with. And later on I

helped him with some measurements there.

Q. Okay. Well, let's understand. You

parked here, you met Lieutenant Cochran

where, somewhere on Mulberry Street?

A. Somewhere right along that area right

here.

Q. In this vicinity. You exited your

car, you met him. Did you notice what was

going on over at the Lorraine Motel?

A. No, sir, I didn't. I just seen some

people over there. That's all I could see.

Q. And you met Lieutenant Cochran, and

he instructed you to go up behind the rooming

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

869

house.

A. Yes. Both myself and the two

officers with me was just checking the

general area for anybody.

Q. And you were advised to go up into

this brush area here?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Now, how did you climb that wall?

A. I don't recall. I believe there was

a drum somebody had placed down there -- a

55-gallon drum or something, best I

remember. But I know we did have trouble

getting over because it was a fairly high

wall there next to the street.

Q. How high would you say that wall was?

A. Oh, best of my recollection, probably

at least six foot I would think. I'm not

sure.

Q. So you put this drum --

A. No, sir, I didn't. I think some of

the other officers --

Q. The drum was already there?

A. Yes, sir, I think some of the other

officers had already placed it there.

Q. Was this drum standing upright?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

870

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And was it close to the wall?

A. Yes, sir, it was right up against the

wall.

Q. And where was it in the area of the

wall?

A. Best I remember, it was down close to

where we parked the squad car, right in that

area -- right along in there somewhere, yes,

sir.

Q. In here?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Would it have been near the corner of

the wall?

A. Possibility it would have been near

the corner of the wall.

Q. By "the corner of the wall," I'm

pointing to the northeast corner --

northeast --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- section of the wall. All right.

So you jumped on that drum, did you?

A. Yes, sir. Best I remember I got up

there, yes. Because I recall it was the --

the wall was fairly high. It would have been

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

871

difficult to climb up on.

Q. How tall are you?

A. Six foot.

Q. You're six foot?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And how tall was this drum?

A. Well, a 55-gallon drum, probably 3

foot.

Q. About 3 foot?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. So if you stood upright on that drum,

the top of your head would have been about 9

feet above the ground?

A. Probably. Something like that, yes,

sir.

Q. Do you recall standing on the drum --

standing upright?

A. No, sir, I do not recall that.

Q. What did you do? How did you climb

up?

A. I would have got on the drum and then

pushed myself up on the wall and made my way

through the -- it was real brushy, that area

was. It was quite --

Q. Okay. Can you describe that area

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

872

that you made your way through?

A. Yes. It was real thick brush and

stuff in there. It was quite difficult to

get through. It was overgrown really bad.

Q. It was overgrown really bad?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. It was really thick brush?

A. Yes, sir. Once you got past the

initial -- I would say kind of like a hedge

area, it was weedy, but you could walk right

behind the building there.

Q. Well, that's way in here --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- behind the building.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. But in this area here --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- it was thick --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- in the bushes. What did you do

when you sort of fought your way through

these bushes?

A. Where I went to first I'm not really

sure. But I just remember checking the sides

of the building to my right to the area in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

873

there. Too, of course, on the way in there

we was kind of checking the best we could

within the weed area itself where it was

overgrown, you know, looking around in

there.

And I came up to the -- then to the

back part of the building right in there, and

I worked myself around the corner to your

right -- right around like that into the open

area right in there between the building.

Q. Okay. So you're telling us that you

came up to the back of the --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- this wing -- the northern wing of

the rooming house and worked your way around

this corner.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And there is an alley way between the

two wings of the rooming house --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- is that right? And did you go

down into that alley way in that area?

A. Yes, sir. I didn't get into the

alley way itself. I moved just a short

distance around the corner of the building

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

874

there when I found a -- a footprint.

Q. Now, you found then a footprint.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Where did you find that footprint?

A. The best I remember -- wasn't -- it

was close just as I come around the corner

just a short distance. I ran into it right

along in there somewhere. I'm not really --

as far as foot wise, I wouldn't say how far.

I couldn't recall. It was just around the

corner shortly -- after I stepped around the

corner, I did observe it.

Q. Was it a very distinct footprint?

A. Yes, sir. I had no trouble seeing

it.

Q. Did it appear to you to have been

freshly made?

A. Yes, sir, at that time it did appear

to be a fresh print.

Q. Was there more than one footprint?

A. No, sir. One was all I can recall

observing.

Q. Somehow you saw this one, what

appeared to be, freshly made footprint right

in this area here.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

875

A. Yes, sir.

Q. What did you do after you discovered

the footprint?

A. One of the officers -- I believe I

spoke to one of the officers and told him to

advise Lieutenant Cochran that I had located

a footprint. And he sent word back for me to

stay with the print until he had one of the

other officers arrive on the scene. He

wanted to take a cast of it.

Q. Now, Mr. Hodges, do you recall in

which direction that footprint was pointing?

A. Best I remember, it was -- let's

see. That would have been west. It would

have been pointing west.

Q. It was pointing actually toward the

alley way?

A. Right. Yes, sir.

Q. Now, Mr. Hodges, did any of your

group follow that footprint down the alley

way to the entrance to the basement of this

rooming house?

A. I don't know because I -- I stayed

with the cast. And as soon as they got

there, Lieutenant Cochran had me to -- he

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

876

wanted to do some measurements to the bullet

directly from the rooming house to the

Lorraine Motel over there. And I stayed with

him, so I don't know if any of the

officers -- I didn't myself, and I don't -- I

didn't see any other officers go down.

Q. So you just remained with the

footprint.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Now, how long after the shooting --

now, we're trying again to get you to try to

recall time frames. How long after the

shooting would you say you actually had come

upon that footprint?

A. 15 minutes at the most I would

think. Because he assigned us immediately

when we got there and told us to start

scouring the area, looking, you know. And

that was -- I came up behind -- through the

brush to that point. And there was other

officers -- I wasn't the only one in the

brush. There was other officers looking in

there also. And I came to that area and

around the corner of the building there, and

that's when I -- I would say probably a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

877

maximum of 15 minutes.

Q. A maximum of 15 minutes after the

shooting you found this footprint?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. What were the other officers who were

in the area doing?

A. Basically same as I was. Just

trying -- working their way through the heavy

brush to see if they could locate anything or

anything like that. Those that I seen. Now,

there was a lot of officers because the brush

was so thick that I didn't see. I was just

noticing the officers that was close to me.

Q. Do you recall the names of any of the

other officers you saw in that brush area?

A. No, sir, I do not. Just only --

Landers is the only one that I actually

call -- recall that was there. There were

the two officers that were with me.

Q. Was Lieutenant Cochran informed that

this footprint was pointing down the alley

toward the basement?

A. Not to me. He might have been

informed by -- one of the other officers

might have told him, but I didn't tell him.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

878

I just told him I had a footprint.

Q. Did you know Lieutenant Earl Clark --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- at that time? In the time that

you were in this area after the

assassination, did you see Lieutenant Earl

Clark anywhere in sight?

A. I do not honestly recall or remember

seeing him. I could have, but I just don't

remember.

Q. But you don't remember seeing him.

A. Yes, sir. I don't remember offhand,

no, sir.

Q. What kind of uniform were you wearing

on that day?

A. The standard uniform would have been

dark blue trousers and the blue shirt --

light blue shirts, I think, best I remember.

Q. Would any officers have worn a white

shirt at the time?

A. Yes, sir. Your commanding officers

would have had white shirts on that was in

uniform. But as far as the patrolmen, they

would have the same uniform on that I did.

Q. Would lieutenants and captains have

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

879

worn --

A. Yes, sir, lieutenants and above would

have white shirts on.

Q. They would have white shirts on.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Thank you. How long do you recall

remaining with this footprint?

A. Maybe five, ten minutes at the most.

I would say just as soon as he got somebody

up there, I went on and checked with him to

make the measurements.

Q. So you went to other duties after

that --

A. Yes.

Q. -- but in this -- still in this

vicinity?

A. Yes, I was in that same general area,

yes, sir.

Q. Did you at any time enter the rooming

house itself?

A. No, sir, I did not.

MR. PEPPER: That's fine. Thank

you very much, Mr. Hodges. Nothing further.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

880

Q. Mr. Hodges, I believe this area was

the area in fact -- I think you call them

bushes or brush or something like that.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Was that a very thick area -- was it

difficult to walk in?

A. Yes, sir, it was.

Q. And were there a lot of limbs?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Were there leaves on the bushes and

trees?

A. I believe that -- that some of them

had begun to fall off, but I do not recall to

be honest with you.

Q. How high were the bushes and trees?

Were they over your head?

A. Oh, yes, sir.

Q. They were that high?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Do you recall the ground area

there? Was it muddy or dry or do you recall

how it was?

A. Best I remember, it was -- had a

little moisture in it because I recall that

the impression of the footprint was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

881

distinct. You had no trouble telling that it

was a footprint. So I assume there was a

little moisture in the ground.

Q. Now, when you say a footprint -- it

was just one print of a shoe?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. You didn't find anything but one

print of a shoe?

A. That's all.

Q. It was headed west?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Would that be in the direction of the

back of the rooming house or toward the fire

station?

A. Well, it would have been towards the

river, towards the front of the rooming

house.

Q. How far was it -- how far was it away

from the back of the rooming house there

would you say?

A. Well, actually it was the side of the

rooming house there.

Q. Oh, I see.

A. Maybe two or three foot away from the

side of the building on the south side.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

882

Q. Okay. And did you see a door around

there on the rooming house in that area --

did you see any door entry?

A. I don't recall, no, sir.

Q. Let me ask you, how would you

describe the print? Was it what you call a

large one, a small one, a medium one? In

other words -- it was a shoe print; am I

correct?

A. It was a shoe size, yes, sir.

Q. All right. And did it have any

markings on the sole of the shoe that you

could distinguish?

A. No, sir, best I can remember it did

not have any distinguishing marks. It was

maybe a 10 or 11 size shoe -- just rough

estimate.

Q. A 10 or 11 size shoe of a man -- did

it appear to be a man's shoe?

A. Yes, sir, it was a man's shoe.

Q. When you said it appeared to be

fresh, what did you mean by that exactly?

Does that mean that it was just made a few

moments before or the day before?

A. Well, it hadn't been there long to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

883

get any trash or to deteriorate or anything

like that. There was enough moisture in the

ground that there was a good impression. And

normally, as woody as it was around there and

trashy, there would have been trash if it had

been there very long, it would have got blown

in.

Q. Let me ask you something,

Mr. Hodges. When you walked back there, did

your shoes leave tracks? Was it muddy enough

that you left tracks?

A. I don't recall about that. I really

don't.

MR. GARRISON: That's all.

Thank you.

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Mr. Hodges, what was done with that

cast that was made?

A. I have no -- I assume homicide --

well, at that time homicide would have been

handling the scene. And I have no idea what

they did with it.

Q. So you just -- you just stayed by

it. And they came --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

884

A. They came and I left. I didn't even

see them make the cast. I left before they

even poured the cast.

Q. Did you ever hear about what

happened? Did you ever inquire about what

happened to that footprint?

A. No, sir, I didn't. I think I had

seen some pictures at one time of the cast.

But as far as the actual cast, I don't recall

whether I've seen it or not. I don't believe

I have.

Q. And Lieutenant Cochran or anyone else

never told you what happened to it?

A. No.

Q. Or what investigation was done?

A. No, sir.

Q. Once again, to the best of your

knowledge, did you see any police officers

going into or coming out of the basement of

that rooming house --

A. No, sir, I did not.

Q. -- at that time?

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further.

THE COURT: All right, sir, you

may strand down. You're free to leave.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

885

THE WITNESS: Thank you, sir.

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: Call your next

witness.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor, if it

please the Court, plaintiffs have a short

affidavit to put into the record from

Reverend James Orange. Reverend Orange's

sister-in-law died, and he was due to testify

and he had to attend a funeral that was

called yesterday in Detroit.

This is an affidavit -- a statement

that he gave under oath some while ago. This

is the affidavit of Reverend James Orange.

"James Orange, care of Martin

Luther King Center For Non-Violent Change,

449 Auburn Avenue, Atlanta, Georgia, being

duly sworn deposes and says: In 1968 I was a

member of the Executive Staff of the Southern

Christian Leadership Conference. And in

April of that year, I returned with the staff

to Memphis, Tennessee, as a part of SCLC's

efforts on behalf of the strikes being

mounted by the Sanitation Workers.

"On April 4 we were in Memphis

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

886

preparing for a march which was necessitated

by the eruption of violence on the previous

march which was attempted on March 28th. On

that day the Reverend James Bevel and I were

driven around by Marrell McCullough, a person

who at that time we knew to be a member of

the Invaders, a local community organizing

group, and who we subsequently learned was an

undercover agent for the Memphis Police

Department and who now works for the Central

Intelligence Agency.

"It was later in the afternoon when

he brought us back from a meeting to which he

had driven us and both Reverend Bevel and I

noticed that he took us back a different and

longer route than we took when going. In

fact, I recall that Jim raised the question,

though I do not remember McCullough's

response. In any event, when we returned to

the Lorraine parking lot, it was about five

minutes to six. And Bevel and I started

wrestling and joking about below the

balcony.

"We continued the horseplay for a

short while before the shot. After the shot,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

887

we ducked down. And the first thing I saw

was Dr. King's leg dangling over the

balcony. When I saw the leg, that's when I

looked back and saw the smoke. It couldn't

have been more than five to ten seconds. The

smoke came up out of the brush area on the

opposite side of the street from the Lorraine

Motel. I saw it rise up from the bushes over

there.

"From that day to this time I have

never had any doubt that the fatal shot, the

bullet which ended Dr. King's life, was fired

by a sniper concealed in the brush area

behind the derelict buildings. I also

remember then turning my attention back to

the balcony and seeing Marrell McCullough up

on the balcony kneeling over Dr. King looking

as though he was checking Dr. King for life

signs.

"I also noticed quite early the

next morning, around 8 or 9 o'clock, that all

of the bushes and brush on the hill were cut

down and cleaned up. It was as though the

entire area of the bushes from behind the

rooming house had been cleared. They were

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

888

cut to the ground. The police was all over

the place within minutes covering both the

Mulberry and the South Main Street areas.

"I will always remember the puff of

white smoke and the cut brush and having

never been given a satisfactory explanation.

When I tried to tell the police at the scene

as best I saw it, they told me to be quiet

and get out of the way. I was never

interviewed or asked what I saw by any law

enforcement authority in all of the time

since 1968."

This was executed on the 20th day of

January previously in 1993, Reverend James

Orange. We move admission of this affidavit,

Your Honor.

(Whereupon said document was

marked as Trial Exhibit Number 13.)

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiffs call Mr. Jim Smith.

JAMES W. SMITH,

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

889

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Smith.

A. Good afternoon.

Q. Thank you for coming here this

afternoon. For the record, are you here

voluntarily or under subpoena?

A. Under subpoena.

Q. Would you state your full name and

city address for the record.

A. James W. Smith, Memphis, Tennessee.

Q. Thank you. Mr. Smith, were you

previously employed by the Memphis Police

Department?

A. Yes.

Q. And for how many years did you work

with the Memphis Police Department?

A. About seven.

Q. Would you tell us that time frame,

please.

A. From '64 to '70.

Q. And what was your position with the

Memphis Police Department at that time?

A. At which time? I served a lot of

different -- during that time period a lot of

different assignments.

Q. Why don't you just walk us through

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

890

the positions that you had from '64 on.

A. Okay. Started uniform patrol, worked

vice squad, worked special services, pretty

much that -- plain clothes.

Q. What position did you hold in 1968?

A. In '68, special services.

Q. Special services. Would you describe

for the jury what special services entails.

A. Well, it -- some of the assignments

that I worked in special services was during

the Sanitation Strike -- surveillance, escort

on the garbage trucks, plain clothes

assignments, uniform assignments, worked riot

control.

Q. Were you involved in riot control on

the afternoon of the 28th of March?

A. On the morning of.

Q. On the morning of the 28th of March.

A. 28th of March, yes, sir.

Q. And would you describe what your

assignment was and what you did on that

morning of the 28th of March.

A. I was assigned to a tactical squad --

TAC 5. I was assigned at the Memphis Fire

Station Number 2 until the parade started,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

891

and then we were moved up to the parade

route.

Q. And when you moved up to the parade

route, where exactly were you located?

A. On the first move we were moved to

Front and McCall. On the second move they

put us down to Main and McCall.

Q. And where is McCall? It's obviously

off this drawing.

A. Yes. I don't think that street is

there anymore at all. But it's -- was a --

across the street from where the Light, Gas

and Water is now. McCall came in right

there.

Q. And what was your formation at that

time?

A. We were in the tactical squad. The

formation was a wedge formation.

Q. And could you describe a wedge

formation. What does that mean?

A. A wedge formation is like this, and

it's designed to move into a crowd to

disperse it.

Q. All right. Were you spread across

South Main Street at that time?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

892

A. We were on Main just south of Beale

Street.

Q. Just south of Beale Street. But did

you -- did your wedge -- your formation take

up -- spread entirely across the street?

A. Well, there were 12 officers and a

lieutenant, so I would guess we had six on

each side of the wedge and the lieutenant in

the middle.

Q. And is that where you were located

when the march began?

A. Yes.

Q. What did you -- what did you observe

after the march began?

A. We observed the march coming up Beale

Street. And just as it approached Main

Street, we observed some people started

breaking windows.

Q. You heard some shattered glass?

A. Yes.

Q. And where was that glass being

shattered, did you --

A. All along Beale Street there near

Main. There was also one person trying to

knock the window out at the -- what's the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

893

Orpheum Theater now. I think it was a movie

house at that time.

Q. Well, did you see anyone breaking any

windows between your formation and the

marchers?

A. Yes. They were on each side of the

march. They were on the sidewalk, and the

march was in the street.

Q. Okay. So windows were being broken

behind the line of march and in front of the

line of march between the police formation

and the marchers.

A. Right.

Q. Did you or your unit do anything at

that time to apprehend the people who were

breaking the windows in front of the march

line between you and the marchers?

A. No, that was not our assignment.

Q. What -- what do you mean that wasn't

your assignment?

A. Well, they had other officers there

that would tend to that type of activity. We

were there only to prevent anyone from coming

south on Main Street.

Q. So you were told not to break the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

894

formation?

A. Right.

Q. Was that the usual instruction when

you were in that formation?

A. Right. If you break the formation,

you're just an individual acting on your

own.

Q. Did you see any of the other officers

interfering with the people or apprehending

people who were breaking the windows in front

of the march area?

A. Well, shortly after that, things

really broke up.

Q. Well, before things broke up, the

marchers started proceeding, you're in

formation, windows are starting to be

broken -- before things broke up, was there

any attempt to apprehend people who were

breaking the windows? This is before the

march broke up now.

A. I didn't see -- see that.

Q. You didn't see any. Does that seem

strange to you?

A. Well, I really had my hands full

worrying about what I had to do, and I didn't

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

895

really pay attention to what the other

officers would be doing. I was aware of the

windows breaking, and I knew we had to

maintain our formation.

Q. Okay. Now, as the marchers

approached up South Main Street toward you,

what -- could you describe, please, what

happened next.

A. Well, another group started throwing

bricks. They had just demolished a building

there, the old M & M building. And bricks

were stacked up there. And some people not

in the march started throwing bricks, and

that's when the march started breaking up.

Q. At whom were they throwing those

bricks?

A. They were just throwing them. Anyone

that was out there would have gotten hit by

them.

Q. And what was the response of your

unit as these bricks started to be thrown

around?

A. Well, when the bricks started raining

down, they were coming down on the marchers

and everybody. And as people started south

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

896

on Main, we moved up to block them from

coming on Main.

Q. Which people?

A. Everybody. Anybody on the street

that was coming south on Main.

Q. So people started running or --

forward on South Main?

A. They ran in all directions. But

anybody that came south on Main we were

supposed to turn back the other way.

Q. Your instructions simply were just to

prevent them from going any further --

A. Right.

Q. -- as they reached you.

A. Containment.

Q. To contain them. Were you able to do

that? Were you able to contain them?

A. No.

Q. What happened?

A. First thing that happened, somebody

got behind us and our lieutenant went down.

And as we tried to help him, things broke up

and everybody was pretty much on their own.

Q. So it just became chaotic; is that

right?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

897

A. Very much so.

Q. During all this melee, did you see

Dr. King anywhere?

A. He was hustled away as soon as all

those bricks started.

Q. So around the time that the bricks

started being thrown, he was taken away --

taken out of the area?

A. When I saw him, they were ushering

him away.

Q. You saw him taken away.

A. And I didn't keep up with any

movements after that.

Q. Did you ever recognize any of the

people who were throwing bricks or breaking

windows in front of you? Had you seen any of

those people around?

A. I didn't recognize any of them.

Q. Didn't recognize any of them.

A. Huh-uh.

Q. Now, this was on March 28th when this

all happened. Let's back up to Dr. King's

first visit to Memphis related to the

Sanitation Workers Strike which would have

been on March 17th. He was in Memphis on

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

898

March 17th and 18th and delivered a speech.

Do you recall that visit?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you know where he stayed during

that visit?

A. At the Rivermont.

Q. At the Rivermont Hotel. Did you have

an assignment on that visit?

A. Yes.

Q. And what was your assignment during

the course of that visit of Dr. King's?

A. I was told to meet the Feds at the

dead-end of Calhoun Street on the river

bluff.

Q. I'm sorry. Could you repeat that, I

didn't hear it.

A. My assignment that day was -- I was

on a surveillance at Danny Thomas and Crump,

and I was pulled from that and sent to the

dead end of Calhoun Street on the river bluff

to meet the Feds.

Q. Okay. You were sent to the dead end

of Calhoun Street -- pulled off another

assignment and sent to the dead end of

Calhoun Street. And what was your role in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

899

the place that you were sent?

A. Keep vehicular and pedestrian traffic

out of that area.

Q. To keep vehicular and pedestrian

traffic out of that area. Did you learn why

you were given that assignment?

A. I'm not sure I understand your

question.

Q. Well, why did they want to keep

pedestrian and vehicular traffic out of the

area at that time?

A. I learned the next day that there was

a surveillance going on down there.

Q. There was a surveillance going

down -- going on where?

A. In that area.

Q. In that area.

A. Right.

Q. And who was the target of that

surveillance?

A. I was told it was Dr. King.

Q. Dr. King was under surveillance. And

how was that surveillance being conducted?

A. Hearsay. Electronic surveillance.

Q. Well, did you -- did you see yourself

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

900

a van out of which the -- you came to believe

that surveillance was being conducted?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you see at any time any equipment

in that van?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. What was the nature of the equipment

that you saw?

A. It looked like radio equipment.

Q. And was that radio equipment manned

by officers?

A. Yes. There were two people in there.

Q. There were two people in there. Were

they Memphis Police Department officers?

A. No.

Q. What was your -- what is your opinion

of where they came from or who they were?

A. Well, I was told to meet the Feds, so

I assumed they were Feds.

Q. They were federal agents of one sort

or another?

A. Right.

Q. Is it true that at one time you

thought they might have been FBI agents?

A. Yes. At that time when I heard the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

901

word "Feds," I just assumed FBI.

Q. But have you subsequently come to

believe that they were not FBI agents?

A. I've been told that they weren't.

Q. So they were federal agents from some

other federal agency.

A. Some federal agency, yes, sir.

Q. Now, Mr. Smith, how is that kind of

electronic surveillance normally conducted?

Would you just explain -- because you were

involved in the intelligence operations and

surveillance. How would that kind of

surveillance operation be conducted? How

would they be receiving spoken word in that

van?

A. I would imagine they would be

monitoring some kind of transmitter.

Q. And would that transmitter have to be

in Dr. King's suite at the Rivermont CHECK?

A. It would -- if that's who they were

monitoring, it would have to be near that

person, yes, sir.

Q. Did you ever come to learn that there

was microphonic -- that there were

microphones installed in his suite that was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

902

transmitting into that van?

A. That was the -- that was my

understanding.

Q. Yes. Would those microphones have

been in every room of the suite?

A. There's a good possibility, yes.

Q. Would they conceivably have been also

out on the balcony picking up any

conversations out there?

A. There -- there could be, but I'm not

sure they would get a good, clear return on

something like that.

Q. Now, you weren't a part of the group

that did the actual installation.

A. No.

Q. Who would have done the actual

installation of those microphones in

Dr. King's suite?

A. It would be a guess on my part. But

someone connected with the people in the van.

Q. It was their equipment, so that would

make sense, wouldn't it?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you ever have any discussions

with the -- any of the officers -- any of the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

903

people in the van?

A. A couple times I was sent to get

sandwiches and drinks. But other than that,

no real conversation.

Q. Did they ever tell you what they were

doing?

A. No.

Q. They ever discuss what they were

doing with you?

A. No. They just told me to keep

vehicular and pedestrian traffic out of that

area.

Q. Keep traffic away from where they

were. And exactly where was this

surveillance van located?

A. It was on the bluff overlooking

Riverside Drive across from the Rivermont.

Q. Are you aware of the fact that

throughout this -- this sad and sorry history

that the Federal Government has always denied

having Martin Luther King under surveillance

when he was in Memphis prior to his

assassination?

A. I'm not sure I understand that

either.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

904

Q. Well, the question is: Were -- are

you aware that the government -- that the

Federal Government has consistently denied

having Dr. King under surveillance when he

was in Memphis?

A. No, I wasn't aware of that.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you. Nothing

further.

THE COURT: Mr. Garrison?

MR. GARRISON: I have no

questions of this witness. Thank you.

THE COURT: All right, sir.

You're free to leave. Thank you very much.

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: Does anybody on the

jury need a break? All right. Call your

next witness.

MR. PEPPER: May we approach,

Your Honor?

(A bench conference was held at

sidebar outside the hearing of the jury.)

THE COURT: All right. Ladies

and gentlemen, while they're lining up the

next order of proof, we're going to take a

short break.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

905

(Brief break taken.)

THE COURT: Bring the jury out,

please.

THE SHERIFF: Yes, sir.

(Jury In.)

THE COURT: Mr. Pepper, call

your next witness.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiffs call Barbara Reis to the stand.

THE COURT: Barbara Reis.

MR. PEPPER: She's in the

courtroom, Your Honor.

THE COURT: Barbara Reis, come

around, please.

BARBARA REIS,

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Ms. Reis, would you state your full

name and address for the record.

A. Barbara Reis, R E I S, 167 Avenue

Way, Apartment 8, New York, New York 10009.

Q. Ms. Reis, what do you do for a

living?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

906

A. I'm a journalist.

Q. And for whom do you work?

A. For Publico. It's a Portuguese

newspaper.

Q. Is Publico a large Portuguese

newspaper?

A. It's the leading daily newspaper in

Portugal.

Q. Were you the -- the correspondent of

Publico in the United States?

A. Yes.

Q. Are you taking this stand willingly?

A. No, I'm not.

Q. Would you rather not testify about

the events about which I am going to question

you?

A. Yes, as I stated many times.

Q. Ms. Reis, what are your reasons for

not wanting to testify about these events?

A. Because I came to Memphis to cover

the trial, and I don't feel it's -- it's my

place to change from that batch to this one.

Q. Do you believe that your testimony

here in any way could compromise your -- your

professional integrity?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

907

A. I think in a way, yes.

Q. Even though you are not testifying

voluntarily and you have been -- you have

been called against your will?

A. Yes.

Q. How long have you been here in

Memphis covering this -- these proceedings?

A. Since Sunday.

Q. You are aware of the fact that this

section of plaintiffs' case has been

dealing -- it's disjointed to some extent

because of witnesses coming and going and

problems -- but basically dealing with the

issue of the existence of a man called

Raul.

A. Yes.

Q. And you are aware of the fact that

plaintiffs believe on the basis of evidence

that Raul is a native of Portugal.

A. Yes.

Q. Is that one of the reasons why you

and your newspaper have taken an interest in

this case?

A. Yes.

Q. Have you written articles about this

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

908

case that have been published in Publico in

Portugal?

A. Yes.

Q. And how long have you been writing

articles about this case that have been

published in Publico?

A. Two years.

Q. Two years?

A. (Witness nods.)

Q. Would you say how many articles

you've written?

A. Well, on -- on Raul specifically,

just two.

Q. I'm sorry.

A. On Raul's part --

Q. Just on the case generally or any --

any aspect of the case.

A. Well, I -- I did many articles two

years ago when it was the 30th anniversary of

the assassination. I came to Memphis. I

covered the events that took place here. I

reviewed many people for that -- for those

articles, and I did other stories related to

the case.

Q. So you have familiarized yourself

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

909

quite considerably with the case.

A. A little bit.

Q. Now, how long have I known you --

have you known me?

A. Personally -- two weeks I would say.

Q. Not very long.

A. No.

Q. Do you recall where we met for the

first time?

A. Yes.

Q. And where was that?

A. At the Harvard Club.

Q. Where?

A. In New York City.

Q. All right. And at that time did I

ask you a range of questions about Raul and

what information you might have concerning

Raul?

A. Yes, you did.

Q. And did you ask me -- as a reporter,

a journalist, did you ask me a number of

questions about the case?

A. I did.

Q. So there was this kind of exchange of

information. Did you not tell me at that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

910

time that at one point you took it upon

yourself, out of interest, to attempt to

visit with Raul himself?

A. Yes. I actually had tried that

before.

Q. And were you successful?

A. No, he wasn't at home.

Q. But you -- you went to his home.

A. Yes.

Q. Did you at some point, in the course

of your interest and your visit to his home,

develop a certain understanding or obtain

certain information from a source connected

with the family?

A. Yes.

Q. Did that source tell you that these

proceedings and these accusations had been a

burden to the family?

A. Yes. They felt harassed.

Q. And that it had to some extent

disrupted their family life?

A. Yes.

Q. And, in fairness, did the source also

maintain that there was no basis, that this

was the wrong person, not the Raul?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

911

A. Yes. They say that absolutely they

have no connection.

Q. To all of that -- all of that was

laid out for you, all of that objection to

the identification in the proceedings were

laid out to you.

A. They feel they are victims.

Q. Sorry.

A. They feel they are victims of

mistaken -- a mistake.

Q. They feel that they are victims of

mistaken identity?

A. Mm-hum.

Q. That Raul is the victim of mistaken

identity?

A. Right.

Q. Plaintiff has and will be putting on

continual evidence about -- about Raul. And

you may or may not choose to cover that and

review that evidence yourself. But, moving

on, did this source indicate to you that the

government of the United States was giving

them assistance?

A. Not in a specific way. But the

person mentioned they, as the government,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

912

having visit them.

Q. The government had visited them?

A. The person said "they." And I asked

who is "they." And the person said the

government.

Q. The government. How many times had

the government visited them?

A. Three times.

Q. Three times. And what did the

government -- presumably agents of government

here -- what did the agents of government do

when they visited them?

A. I have no idea. It was a very brief

conversation, and I didn't ask specifically

what, and she didn't say what they did when

they went there.

Q. Well, did you have the protection --

did you have the impression that the

government -- that she believed that the

government was giving them some kind of

protection?

A. The person mentioned that they are

protecting us. So in a way of telling me, go

away. You won't get anything from me and,

plus, we are protected. So she said a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

913

general statement regarding --

Q. We are protected, meaning the family

is being protected?

A. They are looking over us. That

was --

Q. They are looking over.

A. That was the expression.

Q. Looking over us. Did the source

indicate that the government was monitoring

their telephones?

A. Yes.

Q. That was a way of protecting them?

A. Exactly.

Q. And she was pleased, was she, that

this activity was going on?

A. I wouldn't say pleased. She -- she

said that, and I took note of it. We

didn't -- I guess she felt confidence, but I

didn't get into that.

Q. All right. So as that -- as the

conversation developed, it emerged that at

least some comfort was being derived from

government protection or government looking

over them?

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

914

Q. Government intervening after this

difficulty began --

A. Yes.

Q. -- for them?

A. Yes.

Q. Was there an indication of the fact

that it was ongoing, this protection?

A. At the time, yes. This was two years

ago.

Q. You made this visit two years ago,

and at the time there was an indication that

it was ongoing, this government protection?

A. I don't know what ongoing can mean.

But three years over -- three times over

maybe three years. So once a year I would

say.

Q. That there was some contact?

A. Mm-hum.

Q. Was there any indication of how the

electronic monitoring or surveillance of

their telephones was being conducted by the

government?

A. I have no idea.

Q. No details of that at all?

A. No.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

915

Q. Only that it was being done.

A. Yes.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further,

Your Honor.

THE COURT: Mr. Garrison?

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Ms. Reis, how do you spell your last

name?

A. R E I S.

Q. I'm sorry. How long have you been

working on this case?

A. As I told -- two to three years.

Q. All right. Has anyone else with your

paper worked on this case besides you?

A. I'm sorry.

Q. Has any other employee of the paper

worked on the case besides you?

A. No.

Q. You're the only one?

A. Yes.

Q. Have you ever contacted any of

this -- well, let me back up. You learned

and know that this gentleman, Raul, is

from -- originally from Portugal. You know

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

916

that, don't you?

A. Yes.

Q. And have you ever contacted any of

his family who still lives in Portugal?

A. No, never.

Q. You know Mr. Ray -- you've heard that

James Earl Ray had left Memphis after the

assassination and ended up in Portugal. You

know that, don't you?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you know anything about the fact

that he had contacted some of this Raul's

family in Portugal when he got there?

A. No.

Q. Had you ever heard that?

A. (Witness nods.)

MR. GARRISON: Okay. That's

all, Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right. You may

stand down.

(Witness excused.)

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor, we have

a short video deposition from a Mr. J.J.

Isabel who is unavailable to testify.

THE COURT: What do you call

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

917

short?

MR. PEPPER: Well, it says 46

minutes, Your Honor.

THE COURT: That's too long. It

will be dark in 46 minutes. We'll have to

start on that tomorrow.

MR. PEPPER: Okay.

THE COURT: All right. Ladies

and gentlemen, we're going to stop at this

point.

(Court adjourned until

Wednesday, November 24, 1999, at 10:00 a.m.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

918

IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF SHELBY COUNTY,

TENNESSEE FOR THE THIRTIETH JUDICIAL

DISTRICT AT MEMPHIS

_______________________________________________

CORETTA SCOTT KING, MARTIN

LUTHER KING, III, BERNICE KING,

DEXTER SCOTT KING and YOLANDA KING,

Plaintiffs,

Vs. Case No. 97242-4 T.D

LOYD JOWERS, and OTHER UNKNOWN

CO-CONSPIRATORS,

Defendants.

_______________________________________________

BE IT REMEMBERED that the

above-captioned cause came on for Hearing on

this, the 24th day of November, 1999, in the

above Court, before the Honorable James E.

Swearengen, Judge presiding, when and where

the following excerpt of proceedings were

had, to wit:

Volume VII

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI,

RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

COURT REPORTERS

Suite 2200, One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

(901) 529-1999

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

919

- APPEARANCES -

For the Plaintiff:

DR. WILLIAM PEPPER

ATTORNEY AT LAW

575 MADISON AVENUE

NEW YORK, NY 10022

(212) 605-0515

For the Defendant:

MR. LEWIS GARRISON

ATTORNEY AT LAW

LAW OFFICES OF LEWIS K.

GARRISON, SR.

100 NORTH MAIN

SUITE 1025

MEMPHIS, TN 38103

(901) 527-6445

Reported by: MS. KRISTIN M. PETERSON

Court Reporter

Daniel, Dillinger,

Dominski, Richberger,

Weatherford

One Commerce Square

Suite 2200

Memphis, TN 38103

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

920

- INDEX -

WITNESS: PAGE NUMBER

JACK SALTMAN

Direct Examination

By DR. PEPPER. . . . . . . . 921

CLAY CARSON

Direct Examination

By DR. PEPPER. . . . . . . . 969

EXHIBITS

Exhibit 14. . . . . . . . . . . . 941

Exhibit 15. . . . . . . . . . . . 943

Exhibit 16. . . . . . . . . . . . 964

Exhibit 17. . . . . . . . . . . . 966

Exhibit 18. . . . . . . . . . . . 969

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

921

* PROCEEDINGS *

THE COURT: Bring the jury out.

(Whereupon, the jury enters the

courtroom.)

THE COURT: Good morning, ladies

and gentlemen.

Mr. Pepper, are you ready to go?

DR. PEPPER: Thank you, Your

Honor. Your Honor, the plaintiffs call

Mr. Jack Saltman.

JACK SALTMAN,

having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY DR. PEPPER:

Q. Good morning, Mr. Saltman.

A. Morning.

Q. Thank you very much for coming here

this morning on this long flight from England

in light of your back surgery. We are very

grateful that you have made this trip.

Would you state for the record,

please, your full name and address.

A. My name is Jack Saltman,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

922

S-A-L-T-M-A-N, and my address is Morwenna.

That's M-O-R-W-E-N-N-A, the Causeway Claygate

in the county of Surrey in England.

Q. Mr. Saltman, can you tell us what has

been your -- your profession over the years?

A. I started off as a print journalist

in newspapers. I went into television in

1961 and became a television producer,

director, and, finally, editor of major

programs in Great Britain for thirty-five

years.

Q. And which television companies have

you worked with in that capacity?

A. My two main employers were the BBC I

worked for for sixteen years and a company

called Thames, that's T-H-A-M-E-S, as the

River Thames, for -- also for sixteen years,

but I also did coproductions with a number of

American companies like Home Box Office and

ABC television.

Q. In actual fact, when did you have the

first contact with the case of the

assassination of Martin Luther King?

A. 1978 to celebrate -- celebrate is the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

923

wrong word -- to note the tenth anniversary

of the assassination, I was asked to produce

and direct a one-hour documentary for BBC

television.

Q. And was that shown in England?

A. That was shown in Great Britain and

sold to a number of other countries.

Although, I'm not sure whether or not it

played in America.

Q. Right. And at that point in time,

did you come to Memphis to work on that

production?

A. Yes, I did. I spent four or five

days in Memphis. That's when James Earl Ray

was in the Brushy Mountain Penitentiary. We

saw him there, and I came to Memphis and then

various other places. We went to New York

and saw the former Attorney General and so

on.

Q. All right. So at that time now, many

years ago, over twenty years ago, you began

to familiarize yourself with this case and

the facts surrounding it?

A. Yes, as I do -- or as I did, I'm

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

924

retired now -- as I did with all major

productions. I did a lot of reading so I

read all the literature that was then

available, and prior to doing mild research,

we had two researchers working on the ground,

and a lot of effort was put into the story to

try to get the facts as right as we possibly

could.

Q. Right. Was there a time then some

years later that you once again became

involved in this case?

A. Yes. In 1990, I think it was. An

idea had been put forward to my company,

Thames Television, that following a program I

produced -- coproduced for Home Box Office in

America and in Britain on the Trial of Kurt

Waldheim, the former secretary general of the

United Nations. We held a trial for our

trial on television, and following that, as a

sort of example of what we could do, and I

was approached with the view to making the

trial of James Earl Ray.

Q. And would you describe how that type

of trial -- documentary trial format works,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

925

both in the case of the Waldheim trial and

the case of the James Earl Ray trial.

A. With enormous difficulty and colossal

headaches, and as you well imagine, having to

work with an awful lot of lawyers who don't

necessarily agree. And the first problem,

obviously, is to try and get a format that is

legitimate because this is not what I regard

as cheap and nasty television.

The trial of James Earl Ray took a

year and a quarter in the making and cost

around about three million dollars. And we

went to endless trouble to try and get

everybody who was factually available,

retired FBI agents, witnesses.

This was not a television drama.

This was reality insofar as we recorded

everything over ten days, and we finished up

with eighty, ninety hours of material. It

was then with the agreement of both

attorneys, we then tried to balance as a fair

representation of all the evidence.

The judge was a real judge. He had

retired. He had been a federal judge in New

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

926

York, and we had agreed that we would use

Tennessee law. The only concessions we made

to television as such was plainly in a

program that was scheduled to run for four

hours.

We couldn't have openings speeches,

for example, running two hours and forty

minutes each. So we had to have some rules

of engagement, as it were. For the rest, we

stuck religiously. In both cases, the

quality of the attorneys and the judges in

both programs, both Waldheim and James Earl

Ray, reflected the serious nature of what we

did.

In the Waldheim program, we had the

former British Attorney General, Lord

Ralenson(phonetic). We had Alan Ryan, who

was the chief prosecutor for the Office of

Special Investigation in Washington as a

prosecutor.

This was as serious as you could get

on television. It must be set at four

hours. It took a lot of effort on the part

of the audience to watch it and follow it

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

927

because no concessions were made to

shortcuts.

Q. All right. And these trials and this

trial of James Earl Ray was tried over many

days; is that correct?

A. Yes. They were both recorded. My

principle was to let the judge run the day in

exactly the same way as His Honor will run

today. My idea was that the cameras would

always be on the outside looking in. We

would never stop and say "take two" or

anything silly like that.

The idea was we would run

continuously as long as the judge wanted the

court to be in session. So we ran both cases

for something like ten or twelve days in the

Waldheim case; twelve -- seven, eight hours

days. We had fifty-odd witnesses two times.

Q. And in both cases, there was no

script at all, was there?

A. There was no script, only a running

order of the witnesses that their respective

attorneys chose to call that day. The entire

script for the day was about half a page of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

928

A-4, which really just said these are the

potential witnesses to be called. That's

all.

Q. And the juries were chosen according

to usual jury selection procedures?

A. To get a jury, I think my total bill

was sixty-four thousand dollars. That's a

good question. I had employed a company to

send them -- first of all, I got three cities

agreed between both attorneys that they

thought they were fair cities to attract

jurors from.

For example, New York was regarded

as too liberal a state so that was refused by

the prosecution, and we sent these private

detectives to select or to choose.

We finished up interviewing -- I

think there was twelve hundred and something

jurors. Out of which, we came down to a

hundred and something, which, together with

the two attorneys, we then played videotapes

of them answering the voir dire questions.

At the end of which, we tried to

then balance male, female and to get an

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

929

ethnic mix as well so that it looked fair as

well as being fair, but insofar as we could,

that was as fair a jury as I think it was

possible to get.

Q. All right. And in the case of the

trial of James Earl Ray, that was aired both

in the United States and in United Kingdom?

A. Yes, it was. And in thirty-four

other countries as well, I think.

Q. And when was it shown?

A. It was shown on the anniversary of

the assassination, the twenty-fifth

anniversary, April the 4th, 1993.

Q. All right. And do you recall the

verdict of the jury in that case?

A. The jury were unanimous. The jury

sat for -- I think it was seventeen hours,

and we had two requests for further

information, which the judge and I saw

sitting outside the jury room, and in the

end, they unanimously found James Earl Ray

not guilty of the murder.

Q. Now, Mr. Saltman, moving on, as a

result of this experience and your previous

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

930

work in the case, did you develop an ongoing

interest as to the facts and the details of

this assassination?

A. Yes, sir. As I said, the program

took fifteen months from the start, my first

trip over here to transmission, by which

time, I had got fairly deeply involved with a

number of the people peripheral to the case.

And, yes, I was on the point of

retirement anyway so I had some time on my

hands, and in a way, the story also chased me

because people knew that I produced this mega

program, and people then came to me with

different angles or new angles, and it

certainly -- the program itself, somebody

said it shook a few trees, and one or two

coconuts fell out.

Q. All right. So then did you --

because of all of this, did you begin your

own independent investigation of this case?

A. Together with an associate, who

without stating, lived over here in Memphis.

We did follow a number of leads, yes, and it

cost me quite a lot of money pursuing leads

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

931

for no other reason than I was desperate to

get to what I believed was the truth.

Q. Right. This section of the

plaintiffs' case, Mr. Saltman, deals with the

issue of the existence of a person called

Raul. Did that individual become a focus of

some of your work?

A. That was the sort of second step,

second major step. We -- we -- Raul, of

course, was a name that had first been

broadcast, as it were, in the days when James

Earl Ray had been arrested in London, and the

name Raul has continued to be part of the --

of the dialogue of this case.

When, as a result of the program, I

was approached through an intermediary to

meet someone who claimed to have known "the"

Raul. I was very interested, and I flew over

to meet them.

Q. And did you have a -- a conversation

and a discussion with a source who claimed

acquaintanceship with Raul?

A. Yes. I had a number of conversations

with someone who claimed that she had known

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

932

Raul in the 1960's, yes.

Q. All right. And where did that lead

you?

A. It led in various directions. It

lead, first of all, as a result of the work

of my associate, to getting a photograph of a

man, or at least a photocopy of a photograph,

of a man we believed was the said Raul, and

it also led me to New York state.

Q. Before you went on that path, was

this source of yours -- her name has come up

in Court -- Ms. Glenda Grabo. Was this

source of yours not steering you towards

Houston, Texas?

A. Yes. She claimed that her friendship

with Raul had all taken place in Houston, and

her story was so extraordinary that when I

first heard it, I'd have to say that I was

profoundly skeptical, but, yes, we did go to

Houston, and there was only parts of the

story that I could get corroboration on, but

what I found interesting were that the parts

of the story that I could corroborate were

all corroborated, and, plainly, if you find

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

933

as any journalist that if someone -- the bits

of the story you can check turn out to be

accurate, it leads you to lend more

credibility to the rest of the story. So she

gained in credence.

Can I also just say one other

thing? This lady -- this lady is a very

uneducated lady. She left school when she

was very young. She had a horrendous life of

abuse when she was young by her father and

uncle. She would forget things. She's under

medication.

And I asked her if she would make

notes of things that struck her because I was

perhaps coming over every three or four

months. And I said if -- perhaps you'd be

kind enough to make notes of things that

strike you.

She took this to mean that I wanted

her to write her life story, and in what I

can only describe as a sort of literary

equivalent of Grandma Moses, she wrote her

life story, and this life story was quite

extraordinary because it is -- it's

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

934

semi-literate. It's badly spelled, but it

tells of her life story.

The relevant bits are a tiny, tiny

part of this, and, again, for me, that led to

an enormous amount of credibility because

here's a woman who really was not used to

doing anything remotely like this who had

gone to this much trouble to tell her whole

story, for which these key bits were only a

tiny part.

Q. That's interesting. And she sent

this to you?

A. She sent me -- she gave me the --

yes. It was written in four thick exercise

books that were two sided. It was -- it was

some work just to read it.

Q. When you went to Houston, did you at

one point or another speak with a former

federal judge who had some knowledge of some

of the events in which this lady spoke?

A. I think he was a state judge rather

than a federal judge, but I stand to be

corrected on that.

I had been given his name through a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

935

contact of a contact and only managed to get

hold of him when we were at the airport

waiting to fly back to Little Rock, and then

drive to Memphis, and I rang him up on the

off chance and said -- asked him if he knew

anything about a man called Raul, and he came

back with a whole raft of material which

astounded me because I gave him no prompting

at all other than to ask him if he knew

anything about a man called Raul who had

been, as he were, moving around in Houston in

the 1960's.

He said that he, as a young

attorney, had defected a number of drug --

gun runners, I'm sorry, gun runners, and

that it was known -- the name Raul came up

quite frequently as the, quote, Mr. Big, of

the gun runners.

He said, I never met him, but he was

quite well known. It was also alleged, he

said, that he had been involved with a

federal agency in the illicit shipping of

arms to the Somoza Regime in Nicaragua.

Q. And did that tend to corroborate

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

936

anything that the witness, Ms. Grabo, had

told you?

A. Well, Ms. Grabo had told me that she

had acted as a driver for Raul and for his

cousin or uncle, Amorro(phonetic), and that

he had -- she had driven down to the dock

side in Houston. She had been given

photographs of the guards on the gates, and

only if certain guards were on duty did she

then drive in.

And at the bottom of the gang plank

of a certain designated ship, there were

wooden boxes which she subsequently

discovered contained disassembled guns. Not

small guns like pistols, as she put it, but

larger caliber weaponry.

And it's plainly fitted in with what

we had also discovered, that this same Raul

that we had met, having seen his

naturalization papers -- not his papers, but

his application -- we knew that he had been

working in an armor factory in Portugal -- in

Lisben, capital of Portugal -- prior to

seeking American naturalization, and I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

937

believe there was an FBI note on the papers

that suggested it was known that he had been

sending disassembled guns out of Portugal at

this time.

He was supposedly a mechanic, but I

think his papers said he was actually a clerk

in charge of the paperwork which enabled him

to do this.

Q. Did you eventually meet with this

judge in Houston?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. And did he face-to-face confirm to

you these details?

A. He confirmed the details to me. I'll

tell you the whole story. I was somewhat

disappointed because this is not a case that

you meet upper middle-class people all the

time.

Somebody once said to me in

litigation you tend not to meet too many

upper-class people. This is a case of an

awful lot of people whose words are extremely

dubious.

I thought with this judge we had got

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

938

a wonderful, absolutely bona fide figure.

Now, undoubtedly, he wasn't happy. He was

very, very well respected. He was very well

educated, and I think for twelve or thirteen

years, he'd been a judge of considerable

repute.

I believe personal circumstances

have changed, and I think his career had

taken a very, very steep downward turn. He

was no longer judging. He was earning a

living as an attorney, and was -- he

corroborated everything he said to me on the

phone.

He was not able to give me any solid

leads that I could follow up. He gave me a

lot of names, but they were all people who

either moved off or gone away. Despite many,

many hours of trying to find people on the

phone, I never did.

I was never able to corroborate

anything that he said other than what he said

that corroborated what Glenda Grabo said.

Q. Did you then at some point meet with

a former associate of James Earl Ray's last

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

939

attorney, Percy Foreman?

A. Yes, I did. I went to the company,

which is still called Foreman DeGarren. The

ghost of Percy Foreman hangs large over the

company, big portraits and photographs of him

all around the offices, and I met DeGarren

there, yes.

Q. And was a part of the information

that you had received earlier an indication

of a connection between Percy Foreman and

Ms. Grabo at some point in time?

A. Ms. Grabo had said -- she had told me

as part of her statement that her husband,

Roy, his brother was on a murder charge and

that she had been told that Percy Foreman was

the top man in the business and had gone

along to see him.

She said that he had said he would

charge her five thousand dollars, but that he

would give her three thousand dollars back if

she were to work for him. She said, I paint

houses; what is that going to be -- what use

is that going to be to an attorney. He said,

well, I want you to do some filing.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

940

I gathered the filing was of a more

sexual nature, and this was acknowledged by

Mr. DeGarren and that that's really what she

was asked to do. She never got the money.

However, when she told Raul --

according to her story, when she told Raul

that she was working for Percy Foreman, he

apparently lost his temper, and there were

furious words between him and Percy Foreman.

Foreman then allegedly rang up

Glenda Grabo and said, your life is in

danger. Now, she claimed by that

statement -- she was driving her car on one

occasion, and her brakes had total failure,

and she was very lucky to escape with her

life, and when she got this warning that her

life was in danger, she sold up her house in

Houston and moved to where she lives now.

Q. Did you at one point obtain a drawing

of Percy Foreman that he had autographed for

Ms. Grabo?

A. Yes. Ms. Grabo gave me -- it was a

cartoon of Percy Foreman, and he had

inscribed it to her in his own handwriting,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

941

and Michael DeGarren, now the senior partner

at the company, confirmed that that was Percy

Foreman's handwriting, and that it was

exactly the sort of thing that he did with

these little bimbos. I don't know what you

call them. That is the -- that is the

drawing.

Q. That is the -- that is a copy of the

drawing?

A. Yeah.

Q. And is that the signature that was

confirmed by Attorney DeGarren?

A. Yes, it is.

DR. PEPPER: Okay. Plaintiffs

move admission of this drawing.

(Whereupon, a document was marked as

Exhibit 14.)

Q. Did you undertake any other

investigative acts in Houston that made you

more -- more comfortable with Ms. Grabo's

story?

A. We found where the alleged -- the

guns were brought to a house on the dock side

there, and we had it pointed out to us where

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

942

these guns were allegedly assembled.

I also went -- I tried to find out

about his -- his cousin, Amorro, and I went

to the Seamen's Union and discovered that --

that he was a retired seaman and that he had

about three years pension that had

accumulated because it hadn't been claimed,

and they had no forwarding address.

I found a man -- his cousin or

uncle, I'm not sure which, had been in a

hospital, and I found him and collected him

from the hospital, and he had lived with this

man for a few weeks and then had gone to his

sister or niece in Brazil, and I got the

address in Brazil from him.

I wrote and phoned the lady in

Brazil and was told that Amorro had died, so

I was then able to let the Seamen's Union

know that the pension that had accumulated

should go to his estate, or there was no

point in paying it anymore.

But I did discover to my

satisfaction there was an Amorro who did

exist, again, consistent with everything

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

943

Glenda Grabo had said. So this together with

the elements and various little pieces began

to build in my mind a conviction that a lot

of what Glenda Grabo said was true, even

though she is a most unlikely source, it must

be said.

Q. Though we're not using the last name

of the family involved here, let me show

you -- it is true, is it, that this Amorro

had the same last name as Raul?

A. Yes, he did.

Q. Let me show you a photograph and ask

if you obtained -- at some point if you

obtained this photograph of the relative of

Raul?

A. I obtained four or five photographs,

and I think that was one of them. I have to

say it's so long since I looked at them, but

I -- but that certainly is him.

DR. PEPPER: That's fine.

Plaintiffs move admission of this

photograph.

THE COURT: All right, sir.

(Whereupon, a document was marked as

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

944

Exhibit 15.)

Q. Now, in the continuation of your

work, did you at some time, from a source,

obtain a photograph of Raul himself?

A. Yes, we did. A contemporaneous

photograph or an old photograph?

Q. A photograph of any nature or any

type.

A. Well, we obtained a photograph that I

believe was the one on his naturalization

papers, so that would have been sixty --

sixty-four was it?

Q. Sixty-seven, I think.

A. Sixty-seven is what it was. I'm

sorry. With age, my memory is beginning --

we got that, and then we -- having got his

address, we then got some contemporaneous

photographs of him.

Q. Right. And when you obtained this

photograph, this naturalization photograph,

immigration naturalization photograph, did

you also obtain information about him? A

kind of report about who he is and where he

came from and that --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

945

A. Yes. It had on his original home in

Lisbon. It had on the date of his passport,

the number of his passport. It had on his

new social security number and the date he

was naturalized, his then address, and then

it had -- attached to it also was this FBI

comment that it was known that he was

shipping arms out of Portugal when he was

there.

Q. All right. Did you subsequently

learn of a place of employment that was

attributed to him?

A. Yes. I was subsequently told where

he was alleged to have worked, yes.

Q. Do you recall where that was?

A. It was a motor company, but I have to

say I cannot remember.

Q. I'm going to show you -- at what

point did you and or your associates put

together this immigration naturalization

photograph into a spread of photographs that

would be available to show to various

witnesses?

A. You're asking me for a date?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

946

Q. Not asking for dates. I'm saying did

you --

A. Oh, yes. Sorry. At that state, yes,

we did. What -- with having obtained the

immigration photograph, what we then did was

we got five other similar type photographs,

and we made a spread of six photographs which

I'm told was the sort of thing the police

would do in this sort of a situation, and

then we used that spread to offer it to

witnesses to get them to identify the one

they thought was the said Raul.

Q. Right. Would you take a look at this

spread and tell us if this is the spread that

you put together.

A. Yes.

Q. And, secondly, would you identify the

immigration naturalization photograph that

you received, do you recall?

A. Yes. It's the -- I identify the

spread as being the one I showed. Featured

there is Carlos Marcello and a lawyer who

went to jail for a couple years for helping

Mr. Hoffa, but the actual photograph of Raul

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

947

is the middle one on the right-hand side.

That one there, yes.

Q. You're indicating it's this

photograph?

A. That's right.

Q. All right. And did you show that

spread to various people who had information

about this case?

A. Yes. I think I showed it to four or

five people who were relevant.

Q. At one point did a former lawyer

of -- attorney representing James Earl Ray,

representing him around the time of the

select committee hearings -- did this

attorney happen to see the photograph you've

identified?

A. It was complete happen chance. I had

been to the prison in Nashville to get James

Earl Ray to pick out -- to pick out the face

he said was Raul, and I come back to my

associate's house, and there were a number of

photographs on the table. Not just that

photograph, but a number of different

photographs, some were the contemporaneous

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

948

ones, various odd photographs we had. I had

taken a lot of photographs where the

gentleman lived.

And this attorney picked that

particular photograph up, totally

unsolicited, and we were actually going out

with her partner for a social evening, and

she picked the photograph up and said, I saw

this photograph in 1978.

And it was particularly resonate

because she didn't say, I saw that person;

she said, I saw that photograph in 1978, and

I was absolutely astonished because here was

a direct link of that particular photograph

and that person, so it wasn't just any Raul.

This was very specifically "the" Raul.

And I said, what happened, and she

said, well, there was a name written on the

back of it, and they checked that out, and it

turned out to be policeman and had no

relevance to the photograph. And I said,

well, did you pursue who the photograph was

of.

She had been shown the photograph

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

949

by, I think, house investigators who were

looking into the house assassination's

committee investigation that was going on at

that time, and she said she was shown the

photograph by one of the investigators, and

they had a copy of it in the office.

And I said, did you pursue it, and

she said, at that time we had no money

backing us at all. James Earl Ray obviously

was in no position to pay, and we just did

not have the money to hire private

investigators to go checking so, no.

Why it particularly resonated with

me was because when I went into the prison

with a -- what you call it -- a notary to try

and get James to make a statement about, you

know, who he thought was Raul. As well as

picking that person up, he said that

photograph was around in 1978. I was shown

it then by the house investigators.

Now, these are two people completely

disparate, completely separate, no possible

contact at all, one in Memphis, one in a

prison in Nashville who both identified not

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

950

just the person, but the specific photograph,

mug shot, and I have to say that I found that

very convincing.

Q. Yes, indeed. You showed this

photograph to James Earl Ray in a prison

cell. Did you show him the individual

photograph, or did you show it to him in the

form of a spread?

A. No. Very specifically, I showed it

to him as a spread with the notary as a

witness. James Earl Ray had been under

instructions from his attorney not to sign

anything, which made my life a little bit

difficult. But what I did, I -- the prison

authorities allowed me to take a tape

recorder in with me, and I got James -- and I

still have that tape -- to identify clearly

on tape that that photograph, the one I

identified, was the Raul that he met in the

Neptune Bar in Canada and subsequently drove

a car for and gave the rifle, the .30-06

rifle, to in Birmingham, Alabama.

And I have that tape recording

still, but I also then got the notary who

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

951

witnessed this to go to another public notary

and swear an affidavit to the effect of what

he had seen and heard -- that James Earl Ray,

in his presence, had identified that

particular photograph.

Q. I see. Moving on then, did you at

some point having accumulated this

information, endeavor to contact Raul?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. And did you speak with him on the

telephone?

A. Initially, I did. I rang him from my

home in England, and as luck would have it, I

picked a bad day. It was his daughter's

wedding day. And I said that I had met his

cousin in England because his cousin was a

merchant seaman and obviously traveled the

world as a merchant seaman, and I said that I

met his cousin, which was not totally true,

I'm afraid.

But I said that I had met his cousin

and I was trying to contact Amorro, and he

said, yeah -- well, I can't remember the

words, and I wouldn't want to mislead

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

952

anybody. I can't remember the words. This

was a long time ago.

And he -- but he left me no doubt at

all that what he was acknowledging -- that he

had a relation with Amorro, who was in

Houston, and he further acknowledged that he

had been in Houston himself.

He then said, I'm sorry, I can't --

there was pandemonium in the background.

There was an awful lot of very excited

voices, which is not surprising being the

bride's house just before the wedding, and he

said, you know, can you possibly contact me

again, and I rang off.

Q. Right. Did you attempt to contact

him again?

A. Some months later. I can't remember

how long. Some months later, I went around

to his house in New York state and knocked on

the door, and the door -- if I can explain --

was -- there was a wrought iron grille type

door, and then there was a sort of mesh glass

door, a glass door with a mesh on it. They

could obviously see out, but all I could see

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

953

was a sort of dark interior of the house with

shapes. That's all I could see.

First of all, a lady came to behind

the door and started hailing what I can only

imagine was abuse. It was in Portuguese. It

sounded like abuse. It was in Portuguese,

and my Portuguese is nil.

Then she was sort of pushed aside by

someone I assume to be the daughter who got

married. She was dressed in white, and I

could see her white outline, and she spoke

perfect English, and she told me to go away,

what did I want, and I was being a nuisance.

I explained that I was an English

journalist, that I had had various

allegations made to me about her father, and

all I wanted to do was to sit down with her

father. If he wanted, by all means, to bring

an attorney along and sit down with him and

his attorney so I could put the points to him

that I had had made to me and get his

answers.

And I said that if I was convinced

at the end of that conversation that it was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

954

the wrong Raul and he had nothing at all to

do with this that I would leave them alone

and never get anywhere near them again.

She told me that her father was

indisposed. Now, I knew that was untrue

because I could see vaguely a figure of a

male, and I could hear loud state whispers,

and I was fairly sure that was Raul.

In the meantime, the mother had come

around to a side window and was taking

photographs of me through the side window.

For what reason, I have no idea. And the

daughter kept saying that I wasn't doing my

job properly, and I said, well, I'm trying to

do my job properly by checking the facts

because that's what I do.

I don't go dashing in, you know. We

don't sort of get a story today and print it

tomorrow. My protos take a year in

gestation. So about the same time, it's not

anything really.

And then, you know, I said I was

trying to check my facts, and all I wanted to

do was to speak to her father. She didn't

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

955

want to know about this, said her father was

indisposed.

Then I said, would you have a look

at this photograph and confirm -- or with

words to this effect -- that this photograph

is your father, and she said something to the

effect that -- that anybody could get

naturalization photographs, and if I could

get that, then I could get all the other

answers to what I was chasing anyway and not

to bother them, something to that effect.

She left me no doubt at all that she

had positively identified -- I didn't show

her the spread. I showed her an enlargement

of that photograph.

Q. You just showed her a single

photograph?

A. Yes. Yes. There was no point in

asking her to pick out father because I now

believe that was her father. That seemed to

be an academic exercise, so I showed her a

blow up of that -- well, in fact, the

original size we got it, and I was convinced,

as a result of this conversation -- I felt a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

956

bit silly talking through this door. It was

like talking to a wooden door.

And I did -- I had taken a

precaution, journalist precaution, because I

did want to get more photographs of Raul to

try and get people to ID him, and I had hired

a photographer with a long telephoto lens,

and in the end I said, look, I will give you

a mobile telephone number; please, ask your

father.

I'd thrown in various names of

people that I had associated with Raul in the

hope that I would stimulate sufficient

interest or concern that he would at least

want to talk to me, and I gave them the

mobile telephone number. I have to say I did

not give him the hotel we were staying at

because I think I was a little bit scared

really.

Q. Okay.

A. And then -- and then I left my

visiting card in the post box outside, and

after we had driven away, we got photographs

of the daughter in white getting the card out

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

957

of the post box and going in the house.

The following day, I rang Raul from

the mobile, and I spoke to him for about ten

seconds, and, basically, he just hailed abuse

at me and slammed the phone down.

I rang back about ten minutes later

hoping he'd cool down and said, look, all I

really want to do is just have a

conversation, a sensible conversation.

If you're totally innocent, what

have you got to fear? If you're not involved

in any of this, the sensible thing -- now,

I've had forty years in journalism, and I

have spoken to an awful lot of people, many

of whom were villains, but many of whom were

innocently involved and caught up in

something, and the people generally are more

than happy to sit down and tell you their

side of the story.

And quite often, you say, well, I'm

sorry I troubled you, I really am, you know.

The last thing I want to do -- the reason we

never went public with the name, nor ever

have done, was because I never felt I got the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

958

final piece of the jigsaw, and because I

hadn't got that, I thought it would be

wickedly irresponsible to go public with this

person and possibly give them a lot of

grief. That's the job of the law, not of a

journalist like myself.

Q. Could you just --

A. Sorry.

Q. Could you just -- that's all right.

Could you just describe -- it's very

helpful. Could you just describe again for

the jury, so it will help them with the

visualization, of the door and where the

daughter was standing and what was between

you and her, and the second part of the

question is, are you convinced that she could

clearly see the photograph that you showed

her?

A. Yes. The -- it was a modern house in

a row, quite expenses houses. Although, this

was one of the more modest houses in the

row. It was by itself. There was quite a

gap on both sides. There was, I think, three

or four steps up to the front door. The

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

959

front door had an iron grille, an ornate

grille, not a sort of embellished grille,

just a real sort of ornate thing you see in

Spain quite a lot, decorative grilles, and

then there was a sort of a glass door with a

sort of mesh substance.

Now, I could see the shape quite

clearly inside, but it was dark inside.

Outside -- of course, I was in daylight, and

there was no doubt at all that she could see

whatever I was showing her outside. She

didn't say, I can't see the photograph or

anything like that. She acknowledged seeing

the photograph by her answers.

Q. And you are convinced that when she

saw that photograph, she acknowledged that

that was a photograph of her father?

A. I came away absolutely convinced that

she had acknowledge that. Yes, sir, I did.

Q. Mr. Saltman, did you memorialize that

conversation at the front door with her?

A. By memorialize, you mean did I write

it down?

Q. Did you record it?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

960

A. Record it, sorry. Yes, we did. Yes,

I'm sorry. Yes, sorry. It wasn't really

high-tech I'm afraid. It was just a little

old tape recorder that I had with me which I

had in my pocket.

Yes, I did record it. This is my

own safety because, you know, people

sometimes say I was harassing them or

whatever, and I just wanted to make sure that

there was no -- on tape -- anything remotely

like that.

Q. This is routine practice for you in

pursuing your profession?

A. Well, I should think most

journalists, radio, television and print

these days, carry tape recorders. One, to

get an accurate version of what people say.

The days when journalists like me had to

learn shorthand are long since gone. Yes, in

the modern technology, it is standard.

Q. Mr. Saltman, I'd like you to listen

to a tape recording which you have provided

to us and see if you can authenticate it for

the Court and the jury.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

961

(Whereupon, a portion of an

audiotape recording was played.)

Q. Would you identify the other voice on

the tape, please.

A. That's the voice of my associate,

Kenneth Herman, who -- with whom I've been

working on this story for an awful long

time. He was a private detective. He's now

retired to Florida, and that's his voice. He

came with me to the door.

Q. Was anyone else with you at the door?

A. No, no one at the door. Just Kevin

and myself.

DR. PEPPER: Okay.

(Whereupon, a portion of an

audiotape recording was played.)

DR. PEPPER: Your Honor?

THE COURT: Yes.

DR. PEPPER: While the

technician sorts out some of the -- of the

interference here, could we take a brief

recess?

THE COURT: Yes, sir.

(Whereupon, a recess was taken.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

962

THE COURT: Bring in the jury.

(Whereupon, the jury returns to the

courtroom.)

DR. PEPPER: Thank you, Your

Honor. In order to save the Court's time on

this last day before the holiday, what we've

done is to move this tape, authenticated by

the witness, up to a very critical point

where he shows the photographs and asks the

daughter to look at it.

We will leave -- enter the tape into

evidence, Your Honor, and move to have it

entered into evidence afterward and leave it

available to the Court and the jury to listen

to through headphones at any time if they

want to, but, for now, let us just move us up

to that point in time.

(Whereupon, a portion of an

audiotape recording was played.)

DR. PEPPER: Will you repeat

that?

(Whereupon, a portion of an

audiotape recording was played.)

DR. PEPPER: Once more.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

963

THE COURT: Just a moment.

Before you play it again, can you all agree

on what she's saying?

DR. PEPPER: Counsel, do you

want to --

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, I

understand what she said.

DR. PEPPER: We believe she's

saying: You got a photograph from a

naturalization file or thing, and anybody

could get that photograph. Then she goes on

to say: If you got that photograph, you can

get other information that you want.

THE COURT: I can't understand a

word she's saying.

DR. PEPPER: Let's try --

(Whereupon, a portion of an

audiotape recording was played.)

DR. PEPPER: Okay.

THE COURT: All right.

Q. Okay. Mr. Saltman, this is the

conversation that you recall?

A. Yes, it is. Yes, sir.

Q. And you recall this response from

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

964

her: You got this photograph from a

naturalization -- sounded like -- thing?

A. That's right. It's a photocopy of

the photo that was used for his

naturalization papers.

DR. PEPPER: All right. Okay.

Nothing further. Nothing further, Your

Honor.

THE COURT: All right.

Mr. Garrison?

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, I

have no questions. Thank you.

THE COURT: All right. Thank

you very much. You can stand down now, and

you are free to leave if you'd like, or you

can remain in the courtroom.

THE WITNESS: Thank you, Judge.

(Witness excused.)

DR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiffs move admission of this tape into

evidence.

THE COURT: All right.

(Whereupon, an audiotape was marked

as Exhibit 16.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

965

THE COURT: Call your next

witness.

DR. PEPPER: Yes, Your Honor.

This section of plaintiffs' case deals with

the broader conspiracy in the development of

the case of unknown co-conspirator

defendants.

Plaintiff would like to move into

evidence an article that was published by the

Commercial Appeal on Sunday morning,

March 21, 1993. I'd like to read into the

record just one short portion of that

article, and then turn the entire article

over to the pile of evidence.

That is this section: On March 31,

the president of the United States became a

casualty of Vietnam. Johnson announced he

would not seek reelection. On April 3rd,

King returned to Memphis, Army agents from

the 111th military intelligence group

shadowed his movements and monitored radio

traffic from a sedan crammed with electronic

equipment. Eight -- eight Green Beret

soldiers from an operation detachment Alpha

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

966

180-14 were also in Memphis carrying out an

unknown mission. Such A-teams usually

contained twelve members.

Plaintiff moves this entire article

into admission.

(Whereupon, a document was marked as

Exhibit 17.)

DR. PEPPER: As a result of this

publication, which itself followed an

eighteen-month investigation of the reporter,

Your Honor, plaintiffs' counsel became

involved in this aspect of the case and

settled a procedure whereby evidence could be

developed, and I would like to just move the

admission of an affidavit into evidence with

respect to the procedures that were followed

by counsel in obtaining this evidence. I

will only read a portion of the affidavit

that deals with those procedures.

THE COURT: Affidavit by whom?

DR. PEPPER: Excuse me?

THE COURT: Whose affidavit is

it?

DR. PEPPER: May we approach?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

967

(Whereupon, a conference at the

bench was held outside the hearing of the

jury.)

DR. PEPPER: With the Court's

permission, I'll continue.

THE COURT: All right, sir.

DR. PEPPER: Paragraph 10:

Initially, in response to precise question --

well, let me start with nine.

From late summer of 1993 through

August of this year, 1995, the time this

affidavit was developed, I have helped Doctor

Pepper in his work.

Initially, in response to precise

questions, I've provided him with detailed

background information. Also at his request,

I carried specific questions to a number of

the covert Army team, which was in Memphis on

that day of the assassination.

This soldier, who now lives outside

of the United States, knew of Doctor Pepper

and agreed to -- he agreed to answer his

questions. Because Doctor Pepper is a lawyer

and, in particular, James Earl Ray's lawyer,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

968

he would not agree to meet face-to-face with

him. I have known this former Green Beret

now for a number of years and have always

found him to be truthful and reliable.

On behalf of Doctor Pepper, I

traveled to see him on several occasions,

taking with me detailed questions about the

mission in Memphis and other assignments of

his during 1967 to '68. After each trip, I

was debriefed by Doctor Pepper, usually

face-to-face, and subsequently in numerous

telephone conversations.

Both the questions and the

debriefings were detailed and comprehensive.

The soldier would never volunteer

information, neither would he speculate. If

he didn't know the answer, he would say so,

and, occasionally, he refused to comment. I

believe that he was true to form, truthful

and candid in the responses he gave.

Since I was unfamiliar with much of

the subject matter, I was not in a position

to lead the soldier or influence his

answers. That was the procedure that was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

969

followed over quite a period of time, and

this affidavit was executed on 11 September,

1995.

With the Court's permission, I'd

move its admission into evidence as well as

other documents that we will cover in the

course of this examination. We will,

however, also with the Court's permission and

agreement with counsel be redacting names of

individuals in these documents for their own

safety and security, but to enable the Court

and the jury to have access to the documents.

THE COURT: Okay. You have the

Court's permission.

(Whereupon, a document was marked as

Exhibit 18.)

DR. PEPPER: Plaintiffs call

their next witness, Professor Clay Carson.

CLAY CARSON,

having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY DR. PEPPER:

Q. Dr. Carson, good afternoon -- barely

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

970

afternoon. Thank you for joining us here.

You've come some three thousand miles, and I

know that time is precious in terms of your

schedule, so I'd like to just move ahead.

Would you please state your full

name and address for the record.

A. Clayborne Carson, Palo Alto,

California.

Q. And what is your profession?

A. I'm a professor of history at

Stanford.

Q. And what do you -- what is your

relationship to the works and life of Martin

Luther King, Junior?

A. I'm the editor of Martin Luther

King's papers, and I'm director of the Martin

Luther King papers project at Stanford.

Q. And how long have you been in that

position?

A. Fifteen years.

Q. And have you published various works

on Doctor King's work and life?

A. Yes, I have. I've published, I

think, edited or authored five -- I think

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

971

five books on Martin Luther King.

Q. All right. And is the King papers

project at Stanford University an ongoing

project?

A. Yes, it is. It's a long-term project

to publish all of the historically

significant papers of Martin Luther King.

It's been going on for fifteen years. It

will probably go on as long as I go on.

Q. And in your capacity and as part of

that project at Stanford, do you have the

process of collecting documents and materials

of all sorts of natures related to Doctor

King's life, work and death even?

A. Yes, sir. The purpose of the paper

is -- papers project is to assemble all of

the historically significant papers from

archives around the world. We've contacted

probably some two hundred or more archives to

make sure that we have all of the

historically significant papers. Obviously,

the largest collections are those at the King

Center in Atlanta and at Boston University.

Q. Right. And as a part of that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

972

responsibility, did you receive from me

certain documents, certain reports, with

respect to the assassination of Martin Luther

King?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. And it should be clear to the Court

and Jury that you are not in any way involved

in attesting to the accuracy or the validity

of this information, but you are simply

reporting on what it is that you have

received; is that correct?

A. That's right.

Q. So we're asking you to do that in a

professional capacity and in line with your

role as editor and director of the King

papers project.

With that background, Professor

Carson, I'd like you to move, please, to the

first set of responses in the documentation

that I've provided to you and of the project

that I addressed to a resource who was

traveling and providing me with information.

The Court and Jury have become aware

with how that process worked so we just need

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

973

to go into a question and answer mode here.

On Page 2 of -- well, on Page 2 of

the questions and whatever page of the

response, I'd ask you to turn to Paragraph

2.1.4, and the question that was asked to be

answered was: Was the operation, in re, our

target, a one op, or were there other similar

operations? If others, any details

possible. Please, at least learn if they

were domestic, foreign or both.

What is the answer that you have?

A. Answer: Lots of other ops

nationwide. These are the ones I was at,

summer of 1967 -- parentheses, June 12th

through 15th, 1967 -- Tampa, Florida. Two

Alpha teams deployed during riots. Detroit,

summer, July 23rd, riot. Washington,

October 1967, riot. Chicago, just before

Christmas, 1967, recon. February 1968, Los

Angeles.

Q. Thank you. Question 2.1.5: When was

the instant operation? The instant operation

is the Memphis operation against Martin

Luther King. When was the instant operation

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

974

first raised with him, that is, the source.

A, where and by whom? Answer.

A. Answer: Date unknown. Place, Camp

Shelby, Mississippi. Briefed by Captain

Name. First, a recon-op -- not sure when

killing King first mentioned.

Q. What -- 2.1.6: What were the first

details of the operation scenario put to

him? A: Was target named?

A. Yes, King. Another answer.

Q. Yes. Please continue.

A. Young added later.

Q. First answer, King. Young added

later.

B: What was site?

A. Site not set. Depended on our intel

and recon. We positioned at rooftop ascent

across Lorraine motel about 1300 hours, 4

April. Don't know why or how intel came in.

At brief, 0430, reminded Doctor King

was the leader of a movement to destroy

American government and stop the war. We

were shown CR, close range photos, of King

and Young. Don't know -- don't remember

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

975

anyone worrying about killing those sacks of

shit.

One bud -- buddy on Team 1, remember

bragged about him, had him in center mass,

parentheses, this is a sniper term meaning

cross hairs and center of chest. During that

big March in Alabama, should have done it

then.

Parentheses, Bill, I did some

checking from my files. There is a John Hill

listed among the 20th special forces teams

that was deployed in Selma, Alabama in 1965

for the beginning of the march to

Montgomery.

I interviewed two of the team

members who were there, and they said a

sniper team had King in their scope until he

turned left and crossed the bridge. This may

be the same Hill on main team. None of the

other names match.

Another Name -- parentheses, that's

me -- asked about clothes. We were dressed

as working stiffs working on the docks.

Parentheses, I believe this means their cover

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

976

was day laborers on President's Island where

the riverboat barge and the warehouses are

located, end parentheses.

Equipment was stored in suitcases,

moved along, came up in cars from Camp

Shelby. Only place I remember eating in

Memphis was a Howard Johnson's.

My spotter and I were met by a Name

down near the train tracks where we were let

out. I remembered this guy because he looked

a lot like a buddy -- parentheses, buddy of

mine. This guy got us to the building where

we set up. I always figured he was a spook.

From him, we got a detailed AO --

parentheses, area of operations map -- not

the kind you'd buy in a gas station, pictures

of cars the King group were driving, and the

guy got us to the building where we set up.

I always figured he was a spook.

From him, we got a detailed AO --

parentheses, area of operations map -- not

the kind you'd buy in a gas station, pictures

of the cars the King group was driving and

the Memphis police tact -- parentheses,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

977

tactical radio frequencies. Maybe some other

stuff, I just don't remember.

Q. C: Any explanation of reason?

A. Name gave none.

Q. D: Any indication of sanction by or

involvement of others, one at federal, state

or local levels?

A. Everybody but my brother was there.

Spooks, the company -- parentheses, CIA --

Feebs -- parentheses, FBI -- police, you name

it.

The only person I remember talking

to besides CO, Name, was some guy who was the

head of the city -- parentheses, Memphis tact

parentheses -- tactical squad. I think his

first name was Sam.

Name put him on radio to describe to

us what was in that hotel -- parentheses,

Lorraine. I do remember he saying friendlies

would not be wearing ties. Took that to mean

that somebody inside the King group as

informant.

Did meet in person one other guy.

Met him on sidewalk down couple blocks from

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

978

our perch. Directed by Name. This guy

identified himself with the police

intelligence. Said city was about to

explode, and blacks would be murdering whites

in the streets.

After a few minutes, I figured was

asking me to sit tight and kill any rioters

if things went to hell. He seemed to know

something about us and said had met with Name

before this day.

Q. E: Was operation pure military, any

involvement of FBI, state police, local

sheriff's, poster police, civilians, anyone

in targets organization?

A. Our part military. Far as I know, we

were coordinating with units at NAS. This

would be Millington Naval Air Station.

Q. Okay. Move over to the response to

Question 3, please. Was he aware of any

support from inside Doctor King's

organization, SCLC, or inside the local

Memphis groups working with Doctor King?

Details and names if possible.

A. Scuttlebutt was 111th -- parentheses,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

979

military intelligence group out of Fort

McPherson -- had guy inside King's group.

Q. Moving to Number 7. Did he actually

see anything at the time of the shooting?

Where was he precisely?

A. I thought Team 1 had fired early. I

guess I still think they may have. After

that day, I only saw Captain Name twice more,

and both times, he refused to talk to me

about what happened.

After the shot, I keyed --

parentheses, radioed -- CO to ask for

instructions, and after a wait --

parentheses, I think this means Name told him

to wait -- was told to exit building and make

our way to pick-up point.

If this helps, I heard a lot of

gunfire, and I think remembering -- I

remember thinking it was an Army sniper

shot. It surprised me later when I heard

some wacko civilian had done it.

Name described the shooting to me,

and let me tell you this. Whoever fired that

shot was a professional. Even from three

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

980

hundred meters, there's no way just anyone

could make that shot.

Q. Eight: If the military unit did it,

how does he explain the head shot, and their

not waiting for the coordinated hits from the

second target, A-Y, after Young?

A. When you have everybody's hands in

someone's pants, it's a cluster fuck. That's

what happened in Nam -- what happened here.

Q. What kind of weapons were they

carrying?

A. Standard forty-five caliber sidearms,

M-16 sniper rifles and some K-bars --

parentheses, this is a military knife. We

also had some frags -- parentheses,

fragmentation grenades -- and two or three

laws, light anti-air -- anti tank weapon

rockets.

Q. Ten: How did the two teams

communicate with each other? When was the

last contact prior to the killing?

A. By radio. The shot was fired just

after the TTR -- parentheses, top of the hour

I guess this means, 1800, end parentheses --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

981

sit rep -- parentheses, situation report.

Q. Eleven: Set out details of their

exiting Memphis, how -- where they went.

A. Exit by foot to waiting boat.

Q. Finishes the first section. Now the

second -- second series of questions and

answers. We'll just move through these.

Number 1: Where was Young?

A. Best I remember, a bunch of them had

been upstairs. My spotter got Young when

they all left. He went downstairs. He had

come out of his room below and looked like to

me was heading for the -- a car when the shot

was fired. We were just getting ready to do

the sit rep. He was definitely out of his

room.

Q. Second page, 2.15 and 2.16: What was

the nature of the training -- real purpose

training?

A. This was a recon, slash, surveillance

mission to support major Army element at

Millington and possible deployment of other

heavy units, dash, one of the dozens in

cities with large black populations.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

982

We were walking the ground

literally. We would walk city streets to

identify possible sniper and ambush sites,

anything that would help the guys coming into

a riot to survive.

Target reduction -- parentheses,

Bill, he means killing Young and King, end

parentheses -- was discussed as an option

should the situation go in the toilet, and we

had a riot on our hands in the AO --

parentheses, area of operations. Then and

only then was that option briefed.

You need to talk to him --

parentheses, he's referring here to you, end

parentheses -- about how a military mission

is done. Logistics, intelligence,

communications which make up seven-eighths of

a mission. What I'm saying is that target

reduction was brief, but we had to get to a

riot before it was authorized on the net.

Do you want me to go on?

Q. Yes.

A. Here Name digressed into an argument

over radios. Said team had PRC 77's,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

983

although wanted more sophisticated AN, slash,

PRC 117. Caused big argument because they

couldn't get them. Said PRC 77's

unreliable. Out of -- on that roof that

evening, we were watching. I had Young

targeted, but only to watch.

Q. Then moving down -- Bill, I asked

here about the psychological warfare photo

recon stuff at this point. Continue.

A. Big psy-ops (phonetic) plan to

discredit King and his party using any means

at hand. We weren't told much about this,

but, again, SOP with fifth special forces was

psy-ops included and everything.

M-A-C-V-S-O-G had long time begged into

this.

We call this, quote, gray operations

and spreading propaganda to newspapers and

radio stations. This was done a lot against

black pot-heads. I wasn't involved in this,

but I kept my ears open, and this was a big

push.

Any intel we picked up to help this

effort out was passed back up the chain. Not

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

984

sure about reserved element of psy-ops. Most

guys in Nam I knew worked for the fourth

psy-ops group at Teng Sau Nu. I know there

they ran their own newspaper, radio and TV

operations.

Q. Yes. 2.1.7: When was Memphis first

mentioned?

A. Not sure. Original brief of

twentieth recon operations including --

included Memphis among cities where possible

rioting was possible at Camp -- Camp

Landing. Parentheses, Bill, this is in

Florida, end parentheses.

Memphis was scouted 22 February by

Alpha team for sniper communications and

supply sites. We had a lot of stuff going

in, but previous recon produced a lot more.

What we were doing is similar to

Nam. Maps, terrain studies, readouts of

infrared imagery from aerial recon

blackbirds -- parentheses, Bill, he's

referring to SR 71 blackbird over flights of

Memphis and other potential riot cities, this

mentioned in my series, end parentheses --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

985

and anything else we could find, which we

shipped to S2 and Nam Trang.

Here we shipped to Camp Shelby S2.

Where intel went from there, I'm not sure.

Q. 2.1.8: Who was in charge of

training?

A. Name Captain.

Q. How long was the training period?

A. Can't remember. Too long ago. Too

many missions before and after.

Q. During training -- 2.1.13: During

training, who were you told were targets?

A. We were told these were recon

missions whose purpose was to reverse the

cluster fuck in Detroit where our guys didn't

even have maps of city streets. Our mission

was to walk the ground before the heavies --

parentheses, Bill, means tanks and APCs

here -- got there.

Training was entirely based on

identifying communications links, supply

sites, places where troops could be quickly

and safely inserted where the black community

was, where black churches were, where black

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

986

leaders congregated -- parentheses,

restaurants, churches.

Q. 2.1.14: Other members of team

involved other sites.

A. Worked with Captain Name in Tampa.

Q. 2.1.15. Were all those 9-0 second

operations?

A. Don't know and don't care. What I

know is this. You start asking a lot of

questions about the 9-0 second -- he

pronounced ninety-deuce -- you'd better be

digging a deep hole.

Parentheses, Bill, he was very

reluctant to discuss 9-0 second. I tried

several times in this interview to broach

subject. He refused to.

Q. 2.1.16: Who controlled training and

actual operations?

A. Team leader and his exact control.

Q. 3.2: Who was on the February 22nd

Memphis recon mission?

A. I was on it. Will give other names

if agreed they not be made public.

Q. 3.3: Did entire unit go together to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

987

Memphis on 4 April or separate? Explain.

A. No. We went in separate cars in

two's.

Q. 3.4: What time leave Camp Shelby

from Memphis?

A. Don't remember.

Q. 3.8: You're referring to this Name

fellow -- I'm sorry. 3.8: Who did spook on

ground work for?

A. You're referring to this Name fellow

who met us down by railroad yards. Guy

smelled like a company guy. We had maps, but

this guy gave us a detailed map of the AO --

parentheses, area of operations -- not a

regular service station map. This was like a

grid map you got in the field with street and

building names.

Anyway, this Name, I think it was

James reminded me of a friend. I got no

proof though, but he was definitely a spook.

Q. 3.9: Details of conversation.

A. You got to be kidding. We just

talked about the current situation, our

location and radio net.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

988

Q. And then questions 3.9 to 3.14.1: No

answers?

A. Parentheses, Bill, these questions,

he simply could not remember.

Q. That finishes the second section.

Lastly, Professor Carson, you have a

one-page report of a meeting that took place

in Chicago, also at plaintiffs' counsel's

request, having to do with the location of

some photographers on the roof of the fire

station in Memphis.

Would you read that report, please.

A. Trip to meet Name, 1 December, 1994,

Chicago. Location, Hyatt Regency, downtown

off Michigan Avenue. Breakfast, slash,

lunchroom off of lobby.

Description, about five-feet-ten

inches, one-sixty to one-seventy pounds.

Gray, short chopped hair, nice suit --

parentheses, Brook Brothers style -- wing

tipped shoes, erect, obviously ex military.

Said in Vietnam assigned first

SOG -- parentheses, special operation

group -- base, Kan Tu, worked 525th

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

989

psychological operations battalion.

Refused to discuss place of birth,

date of birth or other personal info.

April 3, 4 weekend, 9-0 second operation.

New Colonel Name, worked with him number of

assignments. Two agents in Memphis day of

killing. Therefore, routine photos and

surveillance copied to Name and Name --

Q. Yes.

A. -- believed distributed to other

agencies. Idea to pick up anyone in photos,

might be identified as communist or national

security threat -- such H-U-M-I-N-T-S-O-P in

King's surveillance.

When King came out on balcony,

camera was filming. No photo moment King

shot, but several of him falling.

Second guy with Name watched

approaching cars, heard shot and saw white

man with rifle. Quickly snapped his picture

several times as this guy left scene.

Shooter was on the ground clearly visible.

Name witnessed only his back as left scene.

Said never got a visual face ID.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

990

Name and second guy rooftop of fire

station, both armed with forty-five caliber

automatics. Second guy carried small

revolver in holster, small of back.

Pictures hand delivered to Colonel

Name, but second guy with Name kept

negatives. Name has no copies. Said will

approach second guy for two thousand dollars,

give us name and address.

DR. PEPPER: Thank you very

much, Professor Carson.

There is a final document, which is

a chronology of important dates, that has

been provided to us from January 17, 1967 to

the 4th of April listing dates, times and

places and subjects of meetings that took

place in government agencies throughout that

entire year.

We're not going to go through that

here, but I am going to close that and move

that that be admitted as a part of the total

package of evidence.

Thank you for coming, and no further

questions.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

991

MR. GARRISON: I have no

questions, Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right. You may

stand down.

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: Let me ask you, have

you got anything really short?

DR. PEPPER: I'm afraid not,

Your Honor. I'm sorry.

THE COURT: I know how sorry the

jurors are to hear that.

Okay. Ladies and gentlemen, we're

going to stop here today. I know there are

several of you who want to get started for

the holiday. I hope that you all survive it

and that we'll see you early Monday morning.

(Whereupon, court was adjourned,

and proceedings were to be resumed Monday,

November 29, 1999.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

992

IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF SHELBY COUNTY,

TENNESSEE FOR THE THIRTIETH JUDICIAL

DISTRICT AT MEMPHIS

CORETTA SCOTT KING, MARTIN

LUTHER KING, III, BERNICE KING,

DEXTER SCOTT KING and YOLANDA KING,

Plaintiffs,

Vs. Case No. 97242-4 T.D.

LOYD JOWERS and OTHER UNKNOWN

CO-CONSPIRATORS,

Defendants.

TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

November 29, 1999

Volume VIII

Before the Honorable James E. Swearengen,

Division 4, Judge presiding.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI,

RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

COURT REPORTERS

22nd Floor - One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

(901) 529-1999

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

993

- APPEARANCES -

For the Plaintiffs: DR. WILLIAM PEPPER

Attorney at Law

New York City, New York

For the Defendant:

MR. LEWIS GARRISON

Attorney at Law

Memphis, Tennessee

Reported by:

MS. SARA R. ROGAN

Court Reporter

Daniel, Dillinger,

Dominski, Richberger &

Weatherford

22nd Floor

One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

994

- INDEX -

WITNESS: PAGE

WILLIAM B. HAMBLIN

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 998

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:..................... 1013

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 1015

JAMES JOSEPH ISABEL

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 1016

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:..................... 1024

JERRY WILLIAM RAY

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 1026

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:..................... 1063

WILLIE B. RICHMOND

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 1086

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:..................... 1099

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

995

- INDEX CONTINUED -

WITNESS: PAGE

DOUGLAS VALENTINE

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 1101

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:..................... 1110

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 1110

CARTHEL WEEDEN

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 1111

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:..................... 1120

WALTER E. FAUNTROY

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 1123

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:..................... 1143

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 1148

APRIL R. FERGUSON

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 1155

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

996

- INDEX CONTINUED -

WITNESS: PAGE

JAMES E. ADAMS

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 1167

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:..................... 1175

YOLANDA KING

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:....................... 1177

TRIAL EXHIBITS PAGE

Exhibit 19.......................... 1051

Exhibit 20.......................... 1054

Exhibit 21.......................... 1085

Exhibit 22.......................... 1099

Exhibit 23.......................... 1165

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

997

P R O C E E D I N G S

(Jury in at 10:15 a.m.)

THE COURT: Good morning, ladies

and gentlemen.

THE JURY: Good morning.

THE COURT: It seems that

everyone is all present and accounted for.

Mr. Jowers, the defendant, is still having

some health problems, but we're going to

proceed in his absence. And as soon as he's

able, he'll return. He's still concerned

about the action against him so don't take

this as -- don't interpret it as he's

indicating he's not interested. He is, but

his health is keeping him.

All right. Mr. Pepper, are you

ready to proceed?

MR. PEPPER: Yes, Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right, you may.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiffs call as their first witness today

Mr. William Hamblin.

WILLIAM B. HAMBLIN,

having been first duly sworn, was examined

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

998

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good morning, Mr. Hamblin.

A. Good morning.

Q. Thank you very much for coming here

this morning. I know you haven't been well.

A. No, a little under the weather.

Q. I appreciate your making the effort

to come by and be with us. Would you please

state your full name and address for the

record?

A. William B. Hamblin, 322 South

Camilla, Apartment 302.

Q. In Memphis?

A. Right.

Q. How long have you lived in Memphis,

Mr. Hamblin?

A. Oh, probably about -- I came here in

'63.

Q. Been here a good number of years?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And what is your present occupation?

A. I'm a part-time security guard.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

999

Q. You're a part-time security guard?

A. Yes.

Q. In the city?

A. Yes.

Q. And prior to being a part-time

security guard and taking on that position,

were you -- what else did you do previous to

that?

A. Well, I drove a cab for many years,

and I worked as a barber for approximately

ten years -- something like that.

Q. You were a barber for approximately

ten years and you drove a cab --

A. Right, off and on.

Q. -- off and on for a number of years?

A. Right.

Q. And which company did you drive the

cab for?

A. I drove for Veterans and Yellow.

Q. Both of those cab companies.

A. Right.

Q. Now, in the course of your cab

driving activity and your work there, did you

come to know a cab driver named James McCraw?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1000

A. Yeah, I knew him well.

Q. And did you in fact share digs or

share rooms with McCraw?

A. Well, I rented him an apartment one

time. I had an apartment house, and I rented

him an apartment. And I lived in the same

apartment building with him a couple other

times.

Q. How long would you say you knew

Mr. McCraw -- over what period of time?

A. Oh, probably about 25 years.

Q. So you knew him over 25 years.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you know him after the date in

question in this case, after the

assassination Dr. Martin Luther King?

A. Yes, sir, I met him after the date.

Q. You met him afterward?

A. Yes.

Q. And you knew him for all of those

years after the assassination?

A. Yeah, it was after the

assassination. I drove a short time before

the assassination, but I wasn't driving at

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1001

the time the assassination happened.

Q. Right. But you new Mr. McCraw during

that period?

A. Right.

Q. Did you not only know him but were

you actually living with him or close to him

in the same building?

A. Well, we shared the same apartment

building more than three times, and he lived

with me a couple of times when he would get

down on his luck.

Q. When he was down on his luck?

A. Yeah. He would lay around on my

couch some.

Q. All right. So it's fair to say that

you were quite a close friend of

Mr. McCraw's?

A. Right, right.

Q. Now, did Mr. McCraw at various times

in the course of this friendship discuss the

assassination of Martin Luther King with you?

A. Yeah, he did.

Q. One time or two times or --

A. Oh, several times.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1002

Q. Several times.

A. Yeah, several times.

Q. And was he in any particular frame of

mind or condition when this subject would

come up?

A. He would usually be drinking when he

started. I mean, you know, he would start

talking about it.

Q. It was when he had been drinking?

A. Right.

Q. Did he ever volunteer any information

when he had not been drinking?

A. No, he wouldn't talk about it then.

Q. Then he wouldn't talk about it?

A. No, he didn't want to hear about it

then.

Q. And when he had been drinking over

these many times when he spoke with you, did

he tell you a particular story?

A. Yeah. He first come out with

a -- he showed me a story that the National

Inquirer or one of those tabloids did on him,

and they did a pretty good write-up.

Q. And was the story that he told you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1003

each of these occasions the same? Was it

consistent?

A. It was -- the story he told was

consistent all those years. He didn't vary

off of it.

Q. Over how many years would he have

told you this story consistently?

A. Oh, I probably heard it at least 50

times at least.

Q. For how many years?

A. Oh, now you're trying to pin me down

on dates, and I'm not good at dates.

Q. Not dates, but just roughly.

A. Oh, I would say probably

15 -- something like that.

Q. Over 15 years. And what was the

story that he told you consistently over 15

years?

A. Well, after I got -- after I read the

article and found out that he knew a little

something about it, I got interested in it

myself. And he would talk about Raul having

a drink with him and he --

Q. Did he mention -- let me interrupt

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1004

you and try to focus you. Did he mention the

defendant in this case, Mr. Jowers?

A. Oh, yes.

Q. Did he know Mr. Jowers well?

A. Yeah. He worked for Jowers at the

time I would say. They were both working at

the Southland Cab Company.

Q. They both worked with the same

company?

A. Right.

Q. Did he tell you of his personal

knowledge of any involvement of Mr. Jowers in

the assassination of Doctor King?

A. Yeah, he said that Jowers gave him

the rifle, and he took it and threw it off

the Harahan bridge.

Q. He said that the defendant gave him

the rifle?

A. Right.

Q. And by the rifle, do you mean the

murder weapon? Is that --

A. Right, right. That's the story that

he told.

Q. And he told you this same story over

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1005

the years?

A. Same story over and over. He didn't

vary off of it. And in the last he came up

and I think they changed it to a bullet or

whatever, but I don't remember if he changed

his story or not. But he...

Q. But he consistently told you he gave

him the murder weapon?

A. Right.

Q. Did he say that the defendant made

any admission against his own interest? Did

he say he made any admission when he gave him

the rifle? Did he say anything to him?

A. He said Jowers told him to get it and

get it out of here now. He said that he

grabbed his beer and snatched it out. He had

the rifle rolled up in an oil cloth, and he

leapt out the door and did away with it.

Q. And Jowers told him to get rid of it?

A. Right. That's the story that he

told.

Q. Do you recall when he said that

conversation took place?

A. No, I didn't. To try to pin me down

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1006

on the date, I couldn't.

Q. Right. But would it have been your

understanding sometime near to the

assassination itself?

A. Well, see, I came in on the picture

probably about five years after the

assassination.

Q. Yes. No, I'm not talking about your

conversation with McCraw. I'm talking about

McCraw's conversation with Jowers. Would

that have been around close to the time of

the assassination?

A. Yeah, that's -- the way I understand,

right after it happened. Right after it

happened.

Q. Now, was Mr. McCraw himself fearful

of being charged or indicted?

A. That's the reason they all changed

their stories. Every time they -- McCraw

really wanted to come out with it, but he was

involved in it. And he couldn't really tell

the truth. That's the reason all of them

changed their stories all this time. Their

conscious was getting hurt, and they were in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1007

fear of being indicted.

Q. Mr. Hamblin, did you tell anyone, in

particular a landlord of yours, that McCraw

knew something about this assassination?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. And was this a landlord in the

premises where both you and McCraw were

living?

A. We were both living at the same time,

right.

Q. And what did you tell to your

landlord?

A. He came by to collect the rent --

Q. Yes.

A. -- and I had introduced him to

McCraw.

Q. Yes.

A. And I told him he was involved in it

in some way and he told us to move.

Q. He told you to move?

A. Right. In fact, he sent the police

up there and harassed us. They locked McCraw

up for having a knife, and we finally wound

up being evicted in about a week.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1008

Q. So you were evicted by your landlord

because you told him this story?

A. Right.

Q. Mr. Hamblin, who was your landlord?

A. It was Mr. Purdy.

Q. Mr. Purdy.

A. Right.

Q. And what did Mr. Purdy do for a

living?

A. Mr. Purdy was an FBI agent.

Q. So your landlord was an FBI agent?

A. Yeah. I didn't know at the time that

he owned the house. I rented from someone

else, but he happened to be the owner. And

he just bumped in to collect the rent.

Q. But you didn't know that he was the

owner before this?

A. No.

Q. And do you know where Mr. Purdy was

assigned as an FBI agent?

A. Probably Memphis office, Memphis

region.

Q. The Memphis office?

A. Right.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1009

Q. And he told you to leave?

A. He told us both to move.

Q. Both to move. And did you move?

A. Yeah, about a week later we got

kicked out.

Q. Now, I want to take you back,

Mr. Hamblin, to 1968. What were you doing in

1968 for a living?

A. I was a barber back in '68.

Q. And where did you work as a barber?

A. Cherokee Barber Shop, 2792 Campbell.

Q. Right. And who was the proprietor,

who was the owner of that barber shop?

A. Vernon Jones.

Q. Mr. Vernon Jones.

A. Right.

Q. How long did you work there as a

barber?

A. Oh, I worked for Mr. Jones probably

for about five years all totalled at two

different places.

Q. Is Mr. Jones alive today?

A. No, Mr. Jones passed on some time

ago.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1010

Q. And were you working as a barber in

that barber shop April 4th, 1968?

A. Yes, I was.

Q. And were you working there

immediately following the assassination?

A. Right. I was working there when they

broke the news about -- oh, I'd say about

6:00 -- 5:30, 6:00 -- something like that.

Q. Now, did you hear Mr. Jones have a

conversation with one of his long-term

customers?

A. Right.

Q. Within -- how soon after the

assassination did this --

A. I would say, oh, probably a week or

ten days.

Q. Within a week or ten days after the

assassination?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And what did Mr. Jones ask this

long-standing customer?

A. He asked him who did it or who do you

think did it.

Q. Who do you think did it.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1011

A. Right.

Q. Meaning who killed Martin Luther

King?

A. Right.

Q. And what did this long standing

customer say to him?

A. He told him that the CIA had it done.

Q. That the CIA had it done?

A. Right. That's the answer he gave

him.

Q. How long had this customer been a

customer of Mr. Jones in the Cherokee Barber

Shop?

A. Oh, ever since I worked for him.

Q. How many years roughly would you say?

A. Oh, I'd say probably -- well, I know

of five anyway.

Q. At least five years?

A. Yeah, at least five -- five or six at

the time that I worked for him he had been

coming in.

Q. People often develop close

relationships with barbers and bartenders?

A. Yeah, they'll tell a barber something

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1012

they won't even tell their own psychiatrist.

Q. Was that the kind of relationship

Mr. --

A. Yeah, that's the kind of

relationship.

Q. -- Jones had with this customer?

A. Right.

Q. Who told him the CIA had it done?

A. I mean I didn't hear the conversation

myself. I asked him what he said when he

left after he had told him.

Q. You asked your boss --

A. Mr. Jones what he said.

Q. Right.

A. And he told me.

Q. And that's what he told you.

A. Right.

Q. Would you tell the Court and the jury

who was this long-standing customer?

A. It was Mr. Purdy, the FBI agent.

Q. The same Mr. Purdy?

A. The same Mr. Purdy.

MR. PEPPER: Mr. Hamblin, thank

you very much. No further questions.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1013

MR. GARRISON: Mr. Hamblin, wait

a minute. I may have a question if you don't

mind.

THE WITNESS: Oh, okay.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Mr. Hamblin, Mr. McCraw was quite a

heavy drinker, wasn't he?

A. Right.

Q. Alcoholic beverages pretty regular?

A. Right. In fact, he was an alcoholic.

Q. All right, sir. And I believe you

said that you would have trouble believing

him, didn't you?

A. Yeah. I had some trouble believing

him at times, right.

Q. You knew Mr. Jowers, did you not?

A. Right. I worked for Mr. Jowers.

Q. And you never heard him say anything

about any of this, did you?

A. Not really, no, huh-uh.

Q. You said Mr. McCraw would change his

story from time to time when he told it?

A. Well, they was -- what I mean was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1014

changing the story, they would accuse another

dead policeman.

Q. When you say they, who are they?

A. Well, they first -- they've named

every policeman in the graveyard. Every time

they get scared, they'll name another

policeman as being the murder man.

Q. Are you talking about Mr. McCraw?

A. Well, both of them.

Q. Both of them who?

A. Mr. McCraw and Jowers.

Q. I thought you said you never have

talked to Mr. Jowers about this, never had

anything to --

A. Well, he's made several statements.

Q. Who has? Whose made several

statements?

A. Well, I talked to him -- I talked to

him on the cell phone about six months ago,

me and Millner.

Q. Okay.

A. And he told me that he didn't do it,

but somebody by the name of maybe Earl Clark

or something like that did it, and he did it

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1015

or whatever.

Q. So that's been six months ago?

A. That's here recently.

Q. Did he tell you he didn't have

anything to do with it?

A. That's what he said.

MR. GARRISON: That's all.

Thank you.

THE COURT: All right.

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Mr. Hamblin, just so that we're

clear, did Mr. McCraw ever change the story

he told you?

A. Never changed his story. He stuck

with the basic same fact -- I took the gun

and threw it off of the Harahan bridge.

Q. So as far as he is concerned -- as

far as you are concerned, the weapon --

A. As far as I'm concerned, that's what

happened. I mean, you know, I believed him

because he stuck to the same story.

Q. So far as you're concerned, the

murder weapon is at the bottom of the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1016

Mississippi River?

A. That's where I would -- if I was

going to go look for the gun today, I would

go look and look at the middle river bridge

because you can drive right to it. You can

walk 20 feet and drop it and be back in your

car in five seconds and be gone.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you,

Mr. Hamblin. No further questions.

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: Call your next

witness.

MR. PEPPER: Plaintiffs call

Mr. J.J. Isabel.

JAMES JOSEPH ISABEL,

having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good morning, Mr. Isabel. If you

have trouble hearing me, please just stop me

and I'll speak louder. Thank you very much

for joining us this morning.

A. Yes, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1017

Q. For the record, would you please

state your full name and address?

A. My name is James Joseph Isabel, 2344

Jackson Avenue, Memphis, Tennessee. Zip

38108-3236.

Q. Thank you, Mr. Isabel. I know you

haven't been well, and we do appreciate you

coming here. You were deposed in this case

on October 14th, and you were kind enough to

answer a range of questions at that time.

And I'm going to put those questions to you

this morning.

A. Okay, sir.

Q. What do you do now for a living,

Mr. Isabel?

A. Well, I'm retired. I'm seventy-four

years old, but I am an independent courier.

I pick up food like for Memphis Hardwood

Flooring five days a week, and I pick up

pagers, take them to get repaired and take

them back to the customer. That's all I do.

Q. And what did you do previously,

Mr. Isabel?

A. Starting which year?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1018

Q. Let's just go through the range of

jobs and work that you've done, if you can.

Just very quickly try to summarize for us.

A. Well, in '43 I was a sailor in the

Navy in a Pacific killing force, and let's

see, then I got out of the Navy. I went back

to CBHS and got my high school diploma. I

didn't have it before I went in the service,

and then I've driven trucks.

I've driven chartered buses. I

worked for Firestone at one time for six

months, and I worked for Vet cab, Hams --

Mike down at Yellow Cab and then Airport

Limousine. Hams owned Airport Limousine. I

met Jowers at Yellow Cab, and Airport

Limousine, they owned -- Hams might have

owned Airport Limousine, and they owned

something else too. Oh, it went from -- I

think we went from Yellow Cab --

Q. But basically you've done a lot of

driving?

A. Yes, yes.

Q. You drove chartered buses?

A. Right.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1019

Q. You drove taxi cabs, limousine

service?

A. Yes.

Q. That constituted the main part of

your life, didn't it?

A. A lot of it.

Q. And when did you meet Mr. Jowers as

you said?

A. I met Mr. Jowers at the Yellow Cab.

That was probably in about seventy -- around

'77 I would think.

Q. So you met him when you were involved

with Yellow Cab at the same time?

A. I was working at Yellow Cab with

Airport Limousine and Hams might have hired

Loyd to come down there and run I think the

whole operation or the biggest part of it.

Q. That's around 1977?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you come to know Mr. Jowers

pretty well?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. How often would you see him?

A. Oh, daily.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1020

Q. You saw him every day?

A. Five days out of seven.

Q. So five out of the seven days in that

period from 1977, you saw him?

A. Right, and sometimes over the

weekends if we had a holiday or something.

We would run the buses from the airport to

Millington.

Q. You saw him then as well?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. So you became quite friendly with

him?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you go on any chartered bus runs

with Mr. Jowers?

A. Yes.

Q. How many did you take with him, do

you recall? If you don't, it's all right,

but roughly?

A. Out of town probably four or five,

and in Memphis, a lot of them -- a lot of

school trips and trips.

Q. I know it's a long time ago and

you've had some medical problems even since

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1021

the deposition.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. So I'm going to try to move you

through your testimony. Did you go on a trip

with Mr. Jowers over one St. Patrick's Day, a

chartered bus trip with him?

A. Yes. Loyd and I took two bus loads

of bowlers to Cleveland, Ohio, and that was

St. Patrick's Day. The reason I remember it,

we were drinking green beer.

Q. Do you remember what year that was?

A. Pardon?

Q. Do you remember the year? Which

St. Patrick's Day?

A. That had to be '79 -- '78 or '79, but

I'm saying '79.

Q. Around 1979?

A. It was winter because Lake Erie was

frozen over.

Q. Right. March 17th, 1979?

A. That's what I'm thinking.

Q. And that trip was to you said

Cleveland?

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1022

Q. In the course of that trip to

Cleveland, did you share a room with

Mr. Jowers?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. In a local hotel?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And did you eat with Mr. Jowers?

A. Oh, yes.

Q. Share --

A. Did I eat with him?

Q. Did you eat?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you go to dinner with him? Did

you drink with him?

A. Yes.

Q. Were you together with him most of

the time?

A. Except when he was driving one bus

and I was driving the other one, yes, sir.

We would go to the same destination, and then

we'd usually meet and go and get something to

eat after we took care of the people.

Q. In the course of one evening on that

trip to Cleveland, did you have a discussion

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1023

with Mr. Jowers about the assassination of

Martin Luther King?

A. Yeah, after we had gone and got the

bowlers, we went out and ate down on the

pier, a restaurant down there, and then we

went back to the hotel. And I took a

shower. I don't think Jowers took one then.

I took a shower, and I came out. And he was

sitting on the bed, and I sat down with my

back against the bathroom on the floor. And

for some reason, I just said -- I said, Loyd,

did you drop the hammer on Martin Luther

King. And he just kind of hesitated for a

moment or two, and he said you think you know

I did. I know what I did, but I'll never

admit it or tell it in a court of law. And I

said, oh, and I didn't mention it to him

again after that.

Q. Did you expect that reply?

A. Maybe, yeah.

Q. And when you asked him did you drop

the hammer on Martin Luther King, what were

you asking him?

A. If he fired the shot that killed him.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1024

Q. And his response again?

A. Pardon?

Q. And what was his response again to

that question?

A. Oh, he said you think you know who

did it, but I know who did it, but I'll never

admit it or tell it in a court of law.

Q. Did you ever raise the subject with

him again?

A. Huh-uh, no.

MR. PEPPER: No further

questions.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Mr. Isabel, you knew Mr. Jowers quite

well. The two of you were on trips together,

weren't you?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And this is the only time that

subject ever came up was just the one time;

am I correct, sir?

A. The best I remember.

Q. He never admitted to you or anyone in

your presence he had anything to do with it

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1025

or knew anything about it other than this one

time; am I correct, sir?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. All right. And on this time, both of

you were drinking, weren't you?

A. Uh, yes.

Q. You had been drinking a little beer;

am I correct, sir?

A. Well, the best way I can describe it,

I can get high on two beers and I had about

six. And Loyd is a pretty heavy toper. He

can handle it, and I would say he would drink

close to 20 beers or more.

Q. All right. Your question to him was

did you drop the hammer on Dr. Martin Luther

King, and that's your question?

A. Yes.

Q. He simply said you think you know who

did it, but I know who did it and I'll never

admit it. Is that basically what he said?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. But he never said he had anything to

do with it, did he?

A. No.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1026

Q. That's the only words he ever used --

A. Yes.

Q. -- that he knew who did it? Is that

right, sir?

A. Yes, sir.

MR. GARRISON: Okay. That's

all. Thank you.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing.

THE COURT: All right, sir. You

may stand down. You're free to leave or you

can remain in the courtroom.

THE WITNESS: Thank you.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you.

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: Next witness.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiffs call Mr. Jerry Ray to the stand.

JERRY WILLIAM RAY,

having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good morning, Mr. Ray.

A. Good morning.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1027

Q. Thank you for coming some distance to

be with us today.

A. Yeah, I'm glad to come down.

Q. Would you state your full name and

address for the record, please?

A. My name is Jerry William Ray, brother

of the late James Earl Ray, and I live in

Smart, Tennessee, 107 Short Street.

Q. Mr. Ray, you are the brother of James

Earl Ray?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Would you just describe for the Court

and the jury the circumstances in which you

were raised and lived as children?

A. We came up real poor during the

depression days. We lived out on the farm

most of the time, and that's when my

brothers -- they had a WPA and he just barely

got by until after the depression. And then

my daddy got a job on the railroad, and then

we were just average people then. But back

during the depression, everybody had it

bad -- anybody who can remember back then.

Q. How many children were there in your

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1028

family?

A. There was nine all together.

Q. And where were you and James in that

constellation?

A. James was the first born, and then

they had a sister Marjorie and John, then I

was the fourth born. We had seven years age

difference.

Q. Seven years --

A. Yes.

Q. -- difference between the two of you?

A. Yes.

Q. And what grade did James go to in

school?

A. I'm not positive what grade. I think

he went to about a year of high school I

think, but I'm not positive of the grade he

went to.

Q. What did he do after that?

A. He went to -- he moved to Alton,

Illinois. See, we lived in a little town

outside of Quincy, Illinois named Ewing,

Missouri, and Alton, Illinois is about 100

miles from Ewing, Missouri. And my uncle

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1029

lived in there and my grandmother lived

there, and they got him a job working at the

Tambery Room. He was fifteen or sixteen.

Q. And he held that job for how long?

A. He held that job -- I forget how long

it was until he went into the Army.

Q. And he had worked up until the time

he went into the Army?

A. Yeah, he worked every day up until

the time he went in the Army.

Q. What do you remember him doing after

he got out of the Army?

A. I don't remember all that much

because he didn't -- he came there a couple

times to visit my mother and my dad. We

lived in Quincy, Illinois. That's where I

was born, and that's where most of our

relatives are from. He come once in a while,

but I didn't see him that much.

Q. Mr. Ray, as you were growing up with

James, did you notice any signs -- obvious

signs of racism or hatred of black people?

A. No. It would be strange to have any

hatred because Ewing, Missouri was just a few

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1030

hundred people, and I didn't never see one

black person in the town. It's just a little

bitty town, and Quincy, Illinois, where I

grew up, they had 42,000 people -- 2,000

blacks and 40,000 whites so I never even went

to school with one. See, and James didn't

either so you can't hate somebody unless you

something -- you know, do something to you.

Q. As he got older though and as you

associated with him, did you see any

hostility toward black people?

A. No, he never did have no hostility

toward any race -- not only blacks, but

Hispanics or anybody. What he tried to do is

live and let live.

Q. Now, he began to get in trouble at

various points in his life?

A. Yeah, after he got out of the Army.

Q. After he got out of the Army. What

was the reason for that? Do you understand

how --

A. No, nobody could understand that

because before he went to the Army, he was a

hard worker. And he went in the Army and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1031

after he came out of the Army, he just lived

the life of crime after that.

Q. How did he get involved with various

types of petty crimes and small time

criminals?

A. Unlike a lot of the media think, he's

easily -- if he makes friends with somebody,

he's easily led around too, see. And I know

he committed -- he robbed a post office

outside of Quincy, Illinois. This is back in

the fifties, and this Walter Rife was his

name. He's a ringleader. After he got him

to rob this post office -- I mean he's as

guilty as Walter Rife was for doing it, but

then he went on a cash spree. They stole all

his money and he got arrested in Kansas City,

Missouri. Then they sent him to the

Leavenworth Federal Prison.

Q. But where did he meet people like

Walter Rife?

A. He met him in Quincy, Illinois.

Quincy -- it was a real kind of a corrupt

town back in the fifties. They had a

write-up in the magazines about them.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1032

Everything was open, see -- gambling,

prostitution, everything. And I knew Walter

Rife and I knew his brother, Lonnie Rife, and

like I say, it's a small town. Only got

42,000 people in the town.

Q. Did James tend to hang out in bars?

A. Yeah, on Fifth Street in Quincy,

Illinois. That's where most of the main ones

was at, and then on Third Street, it was a

house of prostitution -- the whole Third

Street. So when you go up to the tavern,

most of the people you run into was pimps,

ex-convicts or something like that.

Q. Well, eventually he was sentenced and

he went away?

A. Yeah, he was sentenced to

Leavenworth, and I think he got out in 1958 I

think -- '58 or '59, and he was sentenced in

there -- I think he did a little bit over two

years in Leavenworth Federal Prison. Then he

got out, and then he met up with a guy named

Owens. Owens, he was an ex-convict and they

did several things. They robbed a Kroger

store, and then he got sent to Jefferson City

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1033

for that.

Q. Do you know where he met Mr. Owens?

A. No, I don't because I wasn't in

St. Louis at that time. I don't know him.

Q. So he was sent to Jefferson City

Penitentiary?

A. Yeah, for 20 -- I think it was for 20

years.

Q. Now, did you visit him when he was in

the penitentiary?

A. I only visited him a couple times. I

didn't visit him much because I was working

up in -- we wrote all the time. I mean every

week we exchanged letters, but when I would

get down in that area, I would visit him.

But I didn't get to visit him that much.

Q. Well, he eventually escaped from

Jefferson City Penitentiary, didn't he?

A. Yes.

Q. He escaped in April of 1967?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you see him after he escaped from

prison?

A. Yeah. Well, I -- see, I didn't know

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1034

he was going to escape, but my other brother

John had visited him the day before he

escaped. And James told him he was going to

escape and for him to come down and pick him

up and which John did. And John brought him

straight to Chicago, and we rented a room at

the Fairview.

I didn't know all this. They rented

the room, then they called me up. John

called me up, and I came in and we all stayed

at the Fairview that night. That's on South

Michigan Avenue in Chicago. So that was how

they escaped. Then after that, John went

back to St. Louis. We used to give James

$100 because he didn't have no money. He

escaped.

So John went back to St. Louis and

James -- and I went back to work the next

day. Then James got a paper and he found an

ad in there at Klinglens (spelled

phonetically) Restaurant in Winnetka, and

Winnetka is only a few miles from where I'm

at. And he went to work there, and we used

to meet every week or so at a bar there in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1035

North Brook, Illinois.

Q. Well, where were you working at the

time?

A. I was working at the Sportsman's

Country Club in North Brook, Illinois.

That's about five or seven miles from where

he was working at.

Q. And you would then see him from time

to time?

A. Yeah, every week or every other week.

Q. Did John have any more contact with

him?

A. No. Once John left us, you know, the

Fairview Hotel in Chicago, he never had no

contact with James until he got back to

Memphis. You know, when he was brought back

from England.

Q. You mean he had no contact with him

from the time he escaped to the time he was

captured?

A. Yeah, the day after James escaped,

John left and went back to St. Louis and I

went out to work. And John didn't ever have

no contact with him after that.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1036

Q. So were you the only family member

who had contact with James?

A. Yeah, the only one. He called me

every once in a while.

Q. During his fugitivity?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. How long did he stay at this job in

Winnetka?

A. Let's see, he stayed there close to

three months.

Q. What did he do after this job?

A. Well, he saved up a few dollars that

he could save up, and he bought an old car.

I think it was a '57 Dodge because he was

talking when he escaped, when John was there

too, when he got out, he had to get out of

the country, see, and he had to leave because

he had all this time to back up. And not

only the 20 years then for escape and

everything. So he told John -- John heard

that too, and he told me, he said I'm going

to try -- I'm going to save up some money and

go to Canada and try to figure out a way to

get out of the country. And so that's what

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1037

he did. He saved up. He worked there about

three months and he bought an old junker, old

Dodge. Then I met him the night before he

took off and then he took off and went to

Canada.

Q. Do you recall the date that you met

him before he left for Canada?

A. No, I don't recall. It was about a

day before that he took off for Canada.

Q. Which month was it?

A. That was in July.

Q. Was it --

A. July of '67.

Q. Was it toward the end of July?

A. It was either the middle or late part

of July, and the only reason I know, my

birthday is the 16th, so it was a little bit

after that.

Q. Sometime after that?

A. Yeah.

Q. And he left and went to Canada?

A. And went to Canada.

Q. Did you have any contact with him

when he was in Canada?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1038

A. No.

Q. When was the next time you saw or

heard from your brother James?

A. Well, the next time I heard from him

and I can't, you know, quote the days because

I don't keep diaries or nothing, but I guess

it was about six, seven weeks afterwards.

And I think it was in September, probably

late September. He had this pay phone, where

I didn't have no phone in my room.

I worked at the country club where

you get room and board, and we had this pay

phone in the hallway. And he had the

number. That's how you get a hold of me.

Well, he called one day or one evening and

told me to come to Chicago because he knew my

day off. He arrived where so I would have

the day off. He said don't bring your car in

because I'm going to give you my car, and so

then -- so then I took a train.

They had the Northwestern that runs

in down in the loop and he met me down

there. And we spent the night together, had

breakfast together, and he was talking to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1039

me. And he was all happy and, hell, he was

-- he had plenty of money on him. So he

said I'm going to go down to Birmingham and

buy a late model car. He said you can have

this. He said I'm working now, and he

mentioned Raul.

I can't exactly remember how the

Raul came in. I worked for a guy named

Raul or something like that, but then he

said -- he had a big box of stuff. He said

take this to Union Station -- that's a

railroad station downtown Chicago -- and mail

this down to me at Birmingham and mail it to

Eric S. Galt. He said from now on I'll be

known as Eric S. Galt. And so that's what I

did, and he gave me the car. Then I took him

to the station, and later on I mailed that

stuff down to him as Eric S. Galt.

Q. So he came back from Canada. He had

a job so he told you.

A. He told me he had a job working down

there.

Q. He was working for somebody he met in

Canada?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1040

A. Yeah, and he mentioned his

name -- Raul.

Q. Somebody called Raul?

A. Yeah.

Q. Did he tell you what the job was?

A. No. I knew it was something

illegal. I figured it was dope or car theft

or something. You know, I didn't know what

it was, and I didn't actually care that much,

but I knew it was something illegal because

he was trying -- he said he was working this,

you know, this guy he called Raul to get

enough money so he could get out of the

country, you know, get out of Canada and the

United States totally.

Q. So he was doing -- taking on this

job, whatever it was, so that he could get

out of the country?

A. Yeah, get out of the country.

Q. That was the reason he went to Canada

in the first place?

A. Yeah, and I didn't actually -- I kind

of wish I had of now because, you know, I'd

know more to testify to, but I didn't know

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1041

more about it. But right then I wasn't even

inquisitive because I knew he was doing

something illegal and then met some guy over

there and this guy is paying him to run dope

or whatever he's doing. And I don't even

think half the time he knew what he was doing

because they just had him drop a car off in

Mexico and drop one off in New Orleans.

Q. So after he saw you, you talked with

him in Illinois and he went to Birmingham,

did you have any contact with him over the

course of the next year?

A. Well, up until the time King got

killed, from the time we left Chicago when I

seen him last, he called me three times.

Q. And what did he say on those?

A. It wasn't nothing. It wasn't nothing

but just I'm working or asking how the family

is and this and that. And every call would

be under three minutes because I hear him put

the change in and the operator would never

come on. It would be less than three minutes

each call. So probably -- I probably talked

to him about six, seven minutes since the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1042

last time I met him when he left Chicago

until King got killed.

Q. That's the only contact you had with

him?

A. The only contact I ever had with him

after that.

Q. Have you ever known your brother

James over all the years you knew him when he

was free or when he was inside even --

A. Yeah.

Q. -- did you ever know him to engage in

violence?

A. Never. He never had. He never

had -- the most violent thing he ever did was

rob a store, you know, the Kroger store.

That's the most violent ever, but there never

was no violence used in that, you know. And

in fact, before that he was always, you know,

like a burglar. You know, like breaking in

and stealing money, but then when he got with

that -- I mentioned his name before --

Owens. Owens did robbery, see, so then he

went in on the robbery.

Q. In the course of this time when he

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1043

was on the run after he returned to the

United States and those three phone calls

that you had with him, did he ever mention

Dr. Martin Luther King?

A. No. The King name never came up when

we was in the hotel when we met together and

stayed all night or in no phone calls. The

King name was never mentioned, and the last

thing James was thinking about was, you know,

Jackson or King or Kennedy or any of them

people because he was trying to stay out of

prison.

Q. So there was no mention of them?

A. No.

Q. Was there any mention of any activity

that he was being asked to do related to

Dr. King?

A. No, never nothing.

Q. Now, eventually he went to England,

was extradited and was imprisoned in the

United States?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you have more contact with him

after that?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1044

A. Oh, yeah, I was coming down here to

Memphis back in '68 when they brought him

back about every week, and I'd drive down and

we'd visit. And what they had -- like Mark

Lane said, he was treated worse than

prisoners of war, you know, the guys they

tried in Nuremberg. He had a TV set on 24

hours a day and the lights. They xeroxed all

of his mail, and they had him on TV all the

time, you know, hooked up. And so when we

would visit, he would have to write me notes

and flash them because otherwise they would

know everything that he knew.

Q. Did he give you the impression that

he was determined to go to trial?

A. He was determined. He was

determined. That's the only thing he wanted

was a trial because he said he'd have to go

to trial. He said only way I can, you know,

convince the people that I'm not guilty and

try to show the people where I'm at was take

a trial. That was the first trouble he had

with his first attorney Haynes because

William Bradford Huie told Haynes that James

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1045

Earl Ray can't take the stand because if he

takes the witness stand, I don't have no

book. So that's when he replaced him.

Q. Well, there was a contractual

relationship between a book writer and his

first lawyer?

A. Yeah, Arthur Haynes went over to

England, the first attorney James had, and he

brought a contract over for him to sign that

he would represent him if he signed that

contract where he'd get all the royalties off

the books, you know. And so then William

Bradford Huie was the one that paid him the

money.

In fact, before he fired Haynes on

November 1st of 1968, I flew down to

Harpersville, Alabama and talked to Huie.

Huie paid my way down there because he wanted

another contact besides the attorney so he

was showing me these contracts, and he's

talking about changing them around where

James would get the money because his idea

was he'd pay your money. He'll even brag

that everybody has got their -- you know,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1046

paid.

And so I told him -- he told me, he

said the only thing is now you go back and

tell James he's not going to take the witness

stand because if he does, I don't have no

book. So I went back and told James you

ought to fire Haynes because Huie is running

the case.

Q. Well, the writer told you that James

shouldn't take the witness stand when he went

to trial?

A. Yeah, that was later on in a -- later

on in a phone conversation with the -- later

on in a conversation with Mark Lane --

Q. Well, we'll come to that

conversation.

A. Yeah.

Q. And in the event, James did not have

a trial?

A. No, he never had no trial.

Q. How did that come about when he was

so determined to have one?

A. Well, what he done when Arthur Haynes

told him he couldn't take the witness stand

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1047

and James said that's the only way I can, you

know -- because he couldn't give these

lawyers like Haynes -- every time you give

him some information, a phone number or

something, he'd give it to Huie. And he said

how can I get a trial when they know

everything I'm going to testify to.

And so when he got rid of Arthur

Haynes, then he got Percy Foreman, and Percy

Foreman came in and said this is going to be

the easiest case I ever had in my life.

There's no evidence at all against him, and

he did that up until about a month before the

guilty plea.

Then he started crying saying

they're going to execute him, they're going

to do this, do this. And so James asked him

to resign from the case because he was

determined to go to trial anyway, and Foreman

wouldn't resign. And Judge Battle said if he

fired Foreman, he had to go to trial with a

public defender.

Q. So the result was that he didn't go

to trial?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1048

A. No, he didn't go.

Q. He pled guilty?

A. Yeah, Percy Foreman pled him guilty.

Q. I'm going show to you a letter,

Jerry, that was written to James Earl Ray by

Percy Foreman.

(Document passed to witness.)

Q. Take your time, please, and read it.

A. Yeah, I know all about this.

Q. What is the date of --

A. This is May the 9th --

Q. What is the date of that letter?

A. March the 9th, 1969.

Q. March what?

A. 9th.

Q. March 9th, 1969?

A. Yeah.

Q. And when was the guilty plea hearing?

A. Right around that time.

Q. If I may inform them, it was

March 10th. As a matter of fact, it was

March 10th --

A. Yeah.

Q. -- the following day.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1049

A. Yeah.

Q. And what is the purpose of that

letter from Foreman, his attorney, to James?

What does he tell him there?

A. Well, James told me -- you know, I

went down there when Foreman tried to get him

to plead guilty. And he said he's still, you

know, was fighting against it. He said what

I'll do, I'll have Percy Foreman to give you

$500 before I'll plead guilty. Then you can

go down and get another attorney to reopen

the case in which I used the money, the $500,

I flew down to New Orleans. This is even in

a book because the guy I went down to see

about an attorney, he didn't trust me. He

didn't know what I was coming down there for

so he notified the police and the FBI. And

we met in the park and the police was all out

in the park.

Q. Let's focus on this. This is a

letter from his counsel on the eve of trial,

and this letter offers you -- offers him

$500.

A. Yeah, if --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1050

Q. Under what conditions was he offered

$500 by --

A. Yeah, if he don't do no -- if he

pleads guilty and don't embarrass him in the

court. That was the agreement.

Q. And that $500 --

A. And he went along with the guilty

plea. He put in a guilty plea.

Q. We understand that $500 was to be

taken to hire a new lawyer to try to set it

aside?

A. Yes.

Q. Was there in fact an application to

set aside that guilty plea shortly

thereafter?

A. As soon as James got to Nashville, he

wrote a letter to Judge Preston Battle and

asked him to take the letter for motion for a

new trial and that Percy Foreman has been

relieved. And when Battle died a few

days -- I don't know, 20 days or whatever it

was after the guilty plea, he had three

letters from James asking for a trial.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1051

plaintiffs move admission of this letter.

(Whereupon, the above-mentioned

document was marked as Exhibit 19.)

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) So he pled guilty and

was sentenced to 99 years. Did there come a

time when you had further contact with

William Bradford Huie?

A. Yes, back in -- I think October I

believe it was of 1977 when James Earl Ray

escaped from Brushy Mountain Prison. His

attorney then was Jack Kershaw, and I

knew -- I had known Mark Lane, an attorney.

And Playboy came out with a dirty story about

my brother so I recommended to James that he

get Mark Lane to represent him. So Mark Lane

took over the case. Just before he escaped,

the trial was supposed to start. That was in

October.

Q. Let me try to move you through to the

point at hand. Did you have a conversation

with William Bradford Huie around that time,

October of 1977?

A. Yes, sir. The day after the escape

trial, I called William Bradford Huie.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1052

Q. And James had been in prison then for

approximately eight years?

A. Yeah.

Q. And in the course of that

conversation, did Bradford Huie make an offer

to you --

A. He made --

Q. -- to take to James?

A. Yeah, he made an offer, and we got it

on tape. He made an offer that we taped for

$220,000 if I get him in to see James.

Q. Well, he wasn't paying $220,000 for a

visit.

A. No, no.

Q. What was the offer?

A. $220,000 if he would tell him about

killing King and he had to give him, you

know, a story about that he killed King and

that -- he said that's the only way a book

will sell if you write a book that he killed

King.

Q. What would James do with $220,000 if

he was in prison?

A. Well, he said that -- he explained

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1053

that -- he started off with that Blanton was

the governor, and he said we get James out

through Blanton and you and James both can

live good in another country.

Q. So he was going to arrange a pardon?

A. Yes, through Governor Ray Blanton.

Q. Did you record that telephone

conversation?

A. Yeah, it was all taped. Me and Mark

Lane taped it.

Q. And was there a transcription of that

recording?

A. Yes.

Q. Let me show you this transcription.

(Document passed to witness.)

Q. Would you tell the Court and the jury

what is the heading of that transcription,

the date, time and place?

A. It's October 29, 1977, a.m. -- 9:45

a.m. Jerry William -- Jerry Ray or William

Ray, Bradford Huie, Oak Ridge, Tennessee,

rural Scottish Inn.

Q. Would you just look through that

transcription and see if you recognize it as

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1054

the transcription that was made of the tape

recording of that conversation?

A. Yeah, that's it.

MR. PEPPER: Plaintiffs move the

transcription into evidence.

(Whereupon, the above-mentioned

document was marked as Exhibit 20.)

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) What happened to the

tape of that conversation?

A. Mark Lane made the tape and he turned

the copy over to the House assassination

Committee that was investigating the King

assassination of Kennedy at the time, and he

kept the other one.

Q. So the House Select Committee on

Assassinations had a copy of that tape

recording?

A. Yes, had a copy of it.

Q. That same committee decided that

there was no Raul?

A. Yeah.

Q. Is that right?

A. That's right.

Q. And that in fact James got his money

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1055

that he said Raul gave him from robbing a

particular bank in Alton, Illinois?

A. That's right.

Q. Did James rob that bank in Alton,

Illinois to the best of your knowledge?

A. No. I don't know who robbed that

bank. It's still unsolved. I know they had

claimed that me and James robbed the Bank of

Alton.

Q. They not only claimed that, there was

a front page, column one article in the New

York Times on the 17th of November 1978. I'd

like to show you that article.

(Document passed to witness.)

A. Yeah.

Q. Now, that article claims, does it

not, that the Times investigation, the FBI

investigation and the congressional

investigation all --

A. Yeah.

Q. -- concluded that you and your

brother robbed that bank?

A. Yeah, robbed that bank.

Q. Did you take any steps yourself as a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1056

result of those charges?

A. Well, what happened was I was in

St. Louis and James was testifying in

Washington in front of the assassination

committee, and they said we're going to prove

you and your brothers robbed the Bank of

Alton and used the money to finance the King

killing. So a friendly reporter there named

James Alber (spelled phonetically) -- Mark

Lane had called him the same day they accused

us when he got a recess from the

assassination committee and asked him to take

me over there and waive the statute of

limitations.

And so Alton, Illinois is only about

20 miles from St. Louis, Missouri. So we

drove over there and we went in the police

station. First, we went in the bank and they

had a different president then. And so then

we went down to the police station and I

turned myself in and waived the statute of

limitation so they could prosecute me. And

they said are you here to confess to the

crime. I said I can't confess to a crime

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1057

that I didn't commit, but I said Congress

accused me of committing a crime so I'm here

to stand trial. He said you never was a

suspect.

Q. The police officials in Alton,

Illinois said you never were a suspect?

A. Never was a suspect.

Q. Did they ever explain to you how this

type of article got written?

A. No, no. They was mystified that, you

know, they even accused me of doing anything,

and so I don't know if it was FBI making

stuff up or where it's coming at. But it

became -- and like I say, I knew I couldn't

have been a suspect because I worked from '65

to '68 in the North Brook -- Sportsman's

Country Club in North Brook. Never was late,

worked six nights a week, never was late or

never missed a day.

Q. Did they tell you that they had been

interviewed by the New York Times?

A. No, they didn't say anything.

Q. There was no reporter from the New

York Times that interviewed them?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1058

A. Not that I know of.

Q. Did they tell you they had been

interviewed by a House Select Committee

investigator?

A. No.

Q. Did they tell you they had been

interviewed by the FBI?

A. No. As far as that, no, nobody had

ever talked to them about it as far as I know

because they didn't say anything about it to

me.

Q. Yet somehow this appears column one,

New York Times, byline Windell Walls, Junior.

A. Yeah.

Q. 17th of November.

A. See, I don't know if this has

anything to do with it, but in 1981, F. Lee

Bailey had a TV show called Lie Detector on

and they threw me out there. We did two lie

detector tests, and I got tapes of the test

put away. And one, if I was involved in the

King assassination and the one was was I

involved in any bank robberies. And we did

two shows and both showed I was innocent. I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1059

wasn't involved in no bank robberies or no

Assassinations.

Q. Mr. Ray, let me show you an FBI

air-tel dated on July 19th which supplements

one of 7-26-68, and it has to do with an FBI

review of all fingerprints related to bank

robberies at the time in question.

(Document passed to witness.)

Q. What is the conclusion of the

bureau's analysis of all of the fingerprints

of suspects at that time with respect to

James Earl Ray? This is a comparison of your

brother's fingerprints.

A. According to this, they took

fingerprints and it wasn't his. They

couldn't pick up his fingerprints.

Q. What's the last two or three words?

A. The last -- no identification

effected.

Q. And that was in '68?

A. That was in -- let's see, where is

it? 8-1-68 I think. Yeah, or 8-2-68.

Q. About a year after --

A. The bank was robbed.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1060

Q. -- the bank was robbed and some nine

years before the allegations again surfaced?

A. Yeah.

Q. Did you testify before the Select

Committee on Assassinations?

A. Yes, I testified.

Q. Did they raise this issue with you?

A. Yeah, they raised the bank robbery.

I couldn't believe it when they raised the

bank robbery. I told them, I said, what, are

you pulling a joke here? I said I've been

over to the bank and the police station and

turned myself in. Oh, we're not playing no

joke he said and so -- but then they

basically got off that bank. And at first,

he started on the banks and the races and all

this other stuff. Every time they had a

different reason the reason he killed King.

Q. Do you know what the House Select

Committee on Assassinations concluded with

respect to whether or not your brother was a

racist when racism was a motive in this

crime?

A. Yeah, even they admit that wasn't

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1061

true, that he wasn't a racist. They went

through his background, our whole family

backgrounds, and they couldn't find nothing

in our backgrounds.

Q. Moving on, Mr. Ray, did it ever occur

to you in the course of your brother's

imprisonment, either to him or to you, to

contact the family of the victim in this

case?

A. I thought about the King family a lot

over the years, and in a way I wanted to, but

James -- I talked to James about it. He said

don't bother them people. He said they've

had, you know -- they've lost that. He said

they're liable to look at you and think

you're the brother of the murderer. He

didn't know how they felt, see, and it wasn't

until he was dying then a lady reporter from

the New York Times called me up. And I don't

remember her name.

And she asked me if I would talk to

the King family if I had a chance, and I said

sure I'd talk to them. And I told her the

same thing. I said if me and James ever

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1062

talked to them, he goes we'd be out of order,

you know, trying to talk to them. And then

this reporter told Dexter or Coretta King

what I said and that's how we got talking

together.

Q. And that's how the communication

started?

A. Yeah, that's how the communication

started.

Q. Were you surprised when they took a

position in support of a trial for your

brother?

A. I was because I knew it was going to

hurt them bad because the government media,

they're going to really come down on them

like they come down on the Ray family. So it

surprised me because I knew for all these

years they've been getting good press, and

all at once, the press is going to turn

against them.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you, Mr. Ray.

THE WITNESS: Thank you.

MR. PEPPER: No further

questions.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1063

THE COURT: Let's see if

Mr. Garrison has any questions for you.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Mr. Ray, you and I have talked

previously a few times.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And you understand we're here trying

to get the truth.

A. Yeah, that's what we're after, the

truth.

Q. Let the chips fall where they may.

You understand that, don't you?

A. Yes.

Q. Let me ask you something. Going back

to the time that your brother escaped from

prison, how long had he been serving then?

How long had he been in the prison there?

A. He had already been in seven years

and he had a 20-year sentence.

Q. And had he made some effort to escape

before this time?

A. Yes, he had tried to escape before.

Two or three times -- I forget exactly.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1064

Q. Did he ever state to you that he had

any contact or any influence with a warden of

that prison?

A. No, he never did. In fact, like I

said, I only visited him a couple times in

seven years at the prison. And John, I don't

know, my other brother, he visited him maybe

four or five times. But when I went down

there them two times, it was just a friendly

visit.

Q. And when he escaped, you said I

believe that you met him the next day?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And where was that that you met him?

A. Well, John brought him up. John

picked him up when he escaped and he brought

him to the Fairview Hotel. That's on South

Michigan Avenue in Chicago.

Q. And his plan at that time was to get

a job and then try to get into Canada?

A. Yeah, he -- the next day -- we all

three stayed together that night, and the

next day John drove back to St. Louis and I

went back to North Brook. But before we did,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1065

we each give him $100.

Q. Okay. Mr. Ray, let me ask you

something. You -- after the assassination,

you talked to your brother I know several

times or at some time to confer with him?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you ever ask him who he thought

did the assassination?

A. Not completely. He knew some way

that they know who done it and that it's

being covered by the FBI, but he didn't know

who done it or why it was done. And

everybody got their own speculations and

that's why even until the day he died, he

fought to get these files released that's

locked up and won't be released for another

30 years. And Clinton said they could be

released, but they still won't release them.

Q. Why are those files sealed for 30

years? Have you been told?

A. Like James said before he died, they

didn't seal them files to protect me.

Q. Who sealed the files?

A. The assassination committee, they had

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1066

them sealed and then I guess with Congress.

Q. Let me ask you, as you know, I've

spent two days taking your brother's

testimony in prison. Did you ever see him

with this person called Raul?

A. No, no, I never -- I only heard him

mention his name one time. That's when he

came back from Canada.

Q. Did you -- did he tell you that Raul

was financing him and helping him?

A. Yeah, he said he was working for

Raul.

Q. What kind of work was he doing for

Raul?

A. I don't know. I knew it was

something illegal. I assumed gun or drugs or

something because he's telling me about

taking them cars to different cities, you

know, and dropping them off so I figured it

was narcotics.

Q. Do you know -- did you have any

discussion with your brother before he

entered a guilty plea? Did you have any

conference with him about that?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1067

A. Yeah, I came down to visit him. See,

everything we said was taped so you have to

watch what you say and they got the lights

and everything because I didn't want to see

him plead guilty. I knew what struggle he

was on, but he told me too the last time I

seen him he still hadn't made up his mind.

He was still fighting to go to court, and he

told me that Foreman told him if he didn't

plead guilty, they was going to put my dad in

prison which my dad had jumped parole back in

the twenties and was going to charge me as

being an accessory to the murder.

Q. Let me ask you, did you know he was

going to escape before he did?

A. No, I didn't know that. John did. I

didn't.

Q. You had no knowledge?

A. No. I was working up in North

Brook. I was working there like I say six

nights a week.

Q. Did he ever mention to you as to how

he came up with these aliases that he had,

where he got those names from? He had

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1068

several aliases.

A. No, I never did -- I knew a couple of

them -- a Harvey Lomar he used. I grew up

with a guy named Harvey Lomar, a friend of

mine in Quincy, Illinois, but the other one

like the Eric S. Galt and the Ramone Sneyd, I

didn't know how he got them.

Q. Mr. Pepper asked you about the

congressional committee. You testified in

that, didn't you?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. And the conclusion was

that your brother was the one that did the

assassination, wasn't it?

A. I think their conclusion -- if I

remember right, they claimed that he heard of

a $50,000 bounty while he was in the Missouri

prison and he went out and killed King but

didn't pick up the bounty and took off. That

was actually kind of a sad joke. Here you're

going to go out and commit a crime and all

this money spent traveling all over the world

and don't pick up the bounty. Yeah, there's

supposed to have been two guys, Sutherland

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1069

and Kauffmann, in St. Louis supposed to have

been racists that put up the $50,000 bounty,

but they was both dead.

Q. Mr. Ray, had you ever heard anything

about a bounty from someone in Missouri on

Dr. King's life?

A. No. The only thing I heard is what

the assassination committee -- when they came

out, that's the first I heard of it.

Q. Did your brother ever mention to you

that he was ever in a place called Jim's

Grill at any time?

A. No, I don't -- see, the only thing I

can remember, he was telling me about where

he was at at the time that King got killed.

He was at a service station trying to get a

tire fixed, but he never did hardly mention

Jim's Grill to me. I'm not saying he wasn't

in there because I don't know.

Q. Let me ask you this. Did he tell you

that the day this happened that he had gone

up to this rooming house and had registered

as a guest, paid some money? Did he ever

tell you that or did he tell you what he was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1070

doing there?

A. Oh, yeah, he told me that I think it

was at the DeSoto Motel he had bought this

gun -- was in Birmingham I think it was. And

then he -- then Raul said it was the wrong

one and he had to take it back and get

another one, and he told him to meet him at

that motel in DeSoto. Then he picked the gun

up or Raul picked the gun up that night and

later on told him to rent a room on this

place on Main Street.

Q. Did he tell you that he had gone into

the rooming house and had taken any of his

clothing or personal items?

A. No, I didn't ask him what he brought

in there. I never did -- the only thing I

knew, he went in there and they had -- later

on that night had Raul and another guy in

there. And he said that Raul used his car a

lot, that Mustang, so Raul told him he

wanted to use the car later that time and he

wanted to talk to this guy, you know, by

himself anyway. So James told him, he said

I'll go get the tire fixed. He had a flat

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1071

tire coming in, and that's when he went up to

get the tire fixed.

Q. He spent some time in Atlanta, did he

not, before the assassination?

A. Yeah. He lived in Atlanta. I can't

remember the name of the place he lived at,

but some apartment places in Atlanta.

Q. Okay. Mr. Ray, let me ask you this.

You're aware of the fact that after the

assassination, a map was found that your

brother owned that had a home, business and

another location where Dr. King stayed that

was supposed to be part of his property.

You're aware of that, aren't you?

A. Yeah, I've read that.

Q. Have you ever seen the map?

A. No. The only thing I know is what I

read. I read something that something was

circled -- a church or --

Q. A church and his office I believe was

circled.

A. Yeah.

Q. Did you ever see the Mustang that was

supposed to be driven by your brother -- the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1072

white Mustang?

A. No. I've never seen it in my life to

this day because I never did see James after

he left Chicago. Then when they took the

Mustang, I think they sold it to somebody

here in Memphis -- a car lot.

Q. After the assassination on April 4th,

1968, when did you hear from your brother

again? Did you talk to him any more after

that, the 4th?

A. No. After -- I can't remember for

sure. I think it was about two months before

the assassination. Then the next time I

talked to him is when they brought him back

from England to Memphis.

Q. So you had not talked to him from the

assassination up until he was brought back?

A. Until he was brought back. And

within a week after he was brought back, I

drove down and visited him.

Q. Did you know where he was during that

time?

A. Oh, no, no. See, the FBI would keep

me in their office all day long after they

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1073

had discovered they was looking for James

Earl Ray. And the FBI, they would take me

downtown. I was working at night and in

there all day because the FBI told me if he

ever gets in touch with you, will you let us

know, and I said you'll know before I know.

Q. Well, did he ever mention anything

about the fact that this Raul had indicated

to him that they wanted to assassinate

Dr. King? Was anything ever said about that?

A. No, no, no. Huh-uh, no. He never

had got involved in anything like that -- no

murder or nothing like that. The only thing

he was trying to do was just make enough

money to get out of the country, and he said

that guy's paying him good.

Q. Mr. Raul was paying him?

A. Yeah. He only mentioned Raul's name

once by name, and right after that he said

he's paying him good. And I believe he was

talking about the same person.

Q. Let me ask you this. Mr. Ray was

never seen anywhere with this Raul that you

know of, was he?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1074

A. Well, I don't think Mr. Pepper

brought or Attorney Pepper brought this up,

but James sent me down twice -- once right

after the guilty plea. That's what that $500

was for, to go down to New Orleans, because

he'd meet Raul in the Bunny Lounge. That's

on Canal Street.

Q. What was the name of that?

A. The Bunny Lounge -- Bunny lounge.

And it's on Canal Street. And James told me

exactly where it was at, and I went in there

and had two barmaids -- and I mentioned

Raul, you know, like on a friendly term.

Otherwise, you get suspicion and they want to

know what's going on. And the barmaid hadn't

heard of Raul. Then I asked another one

about Randy -- Randy Rosenson because one

time after Raul used a car, when James got

it back, it had a card stuck down in the

side. And on it, it had Randy Rosenson's

name on there and a phone number. And so

then James sent me down again in about '72

and trying to run this guy down. So then

that's when a barmaid said, well, that's

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1075

probably Randolph Rosenson.

So I go back, and James then -- she

says something about he lives in Miami. And

so then I go back in and James had me fly

down to Miami and go to check up on Randolph

Rosenson. They subpoenaed him in front of

the assassination committee, but I don't know

what the outcome was. But anyway, his card

was found in James' Mustang after Raul used

it one time.

Q. When your brother testified before

the assassination committee, were you there

present?

A. No, I was in St. Louis. I watched it

on live TV.

Q. Were you surprised that he entered a

guilty plea?

A. Yeah, I was. I was. I was. Most

people -- I've talked to a lot of people that

in a way don't believe he's guilty, but why

would he plead guilty to something like this

if he didn't do it and --

Q. Did you ever ask him that very

question?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1076

A. Yeah, well, he kicked himself after

he got out of that place they had him in,

see, and he said that's the worse mistake I

ever made in my life because it's hard to

overturn. But like Mark Lane and them talked

about that.

That was worse where he was at than

the Nazis they put on trial in World War II

after Nuremberg because they had the lights

on, the heat on, they had a policeman in

there with him 24 hours a day and he'd

breathe everything he done. And he couldn't

get no visitors. If he did, he had to write

notes to them unless you wanted the state to

know what he was talking about. Then on top

of that, Foreman said they were going to put

me in prison and put my dad in prison if he

didn't plead guilty.

Q. Did you ever know that your brother

owned a rifle of any type? Did you ever know

of any type rifle he owned?

A. No, huh-uh. He wasn't a good shot

anyway, see, if he shot anything. I think

they classify you when he went in the Army

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1077

and he was a poor shot.

Q. Mr. Ray, was your brother in Los

Angeles some of this time after he escaped

from the Missouri prison?

A. Yeah, he spent time -- I didn't know

about it at the time. I found out later he

was out in L.A. a lot.

Q. But you learned he was in Los Angeles

some of the time?

A. Yeah.

MR. GARRISON: That's all, Your

Honor.

THE COURT: All right.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further,

Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right. Mr. Ray,

you may stand down. You can remain in the

courtroom or you're free to leave.

THE WITNESS: Okay. Thank you.

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: At this point we're

going to take break.

(Jury out.)

(Break taken at 11:40 a.m.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1078

THE COURT: Let's bring the

jury out, please, sir.

(Jury in at 12:07 p.m.)

THE COURT: Call your next

witness.

MS. AKINS: Good morning, Your

Honor. We have two statements -- FBI

reports, 302's. Both are taken or one taken

April 25th, 1968.

Mr. Ray Alvis Hendrix, Room 14, Fox

Hotel, 106 Vine Street, Memphis Tennessee,

advised that he is employed by the Corps of

Engineers, U.S. Government on the Dredge

Oakerson. Mr. Hendrix stated he worked about

six months in nice weather and is off the

other six months of the year.

Mr. Hendrix stated that on the

evening of April the 4th, 1968, he and Bill

Reed, who resides in Room 4 of this hotel,

ate their dinner at Jim's Grill located at

418 South Main Street, Memphis, Tennessee.

He stated they left the grill at

approximately 5:30 p.m. and slowly walked to

the Fox Hotel. He said they walked on the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1079

east side of South Main Street.

Mr. Hendrix commented that when they

left Jim's Grill he forgot his jacket and had

to return for the jacket. He said he learned

later that while he was getting his jacket,

Bill Reed looked at a white Mustang that was

parked almost in front of Jim's Grill. He

said he did not notice this Mustang or any

other cars parked in front of Jim's grill.

He stated, however, that when he and

Bill Reed approached the intersection of

Vance and South Main Street, Bill Reed pulled

him back to the curb because the car was

turning the corner. He said this car was a

white Mustang and that after the car turned

the corner Bill Reed commented to him that

this was the Mustang that was parked in front

of Jim's Grill which he looked at while he,

Hendrix, was retrieving his jacket.

Mr. Hendrix stated he did not see

who was in the car but believes there was

only one person. He said he could not

describe him and would not be able to

identify the driver of this car.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1080

Mr. Hendrix stated that as they were

returning to their rooms or possibly or just

entering their rooms, they heard sirens in

the immediate area and going south on South

Main Street. He said he later learned that

the sirens were from police cars that were

going to the scene of the murder of Martin

Luther King. He said as near as he can

recall, he heard the siren about 6:00 p.m. or

just a few minutes after 6:00 p.m. on

April the 4th, 1968.

Mr. Hendrix stated that the Mustang

had turned the corner and proceeded east on

Vance Street, did not turn the corner very

fast or made the tires squeal. He said he

did not watch which way the Mustang turned or

how far it traveled on Vance Street.

Mr. Hendrix also stated he could not

furnish any information as to the cars parked

or traveling in the immediate area of Jim's

Grill at the time that he and Bill Reed

left. He also stated he could not furnish

any information concerning individuals in the

immediate area of Jim's Grill at the time he

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1081

left to return to his room.

THE COURT: What's Mr. Hendrix's

first name?

MS. AKINS: Ray Alvis Hendrix.

THE COURT: Thank you.

MS. AKINS: Your Honor, the

second statement, also FBI report number 302,

was taken April the 15th, 1968, by

Mr. William Zinny Reed. These are pages 66

and 67.

Room 6, Clark Hotel, 106 Vance

Street, Memphis, advised he is employed as a

salesman for a photography firm and is

currently working in the Memphis area. Mr.

Reed stated that on April the 4th, 1968, he

and Ray Hendrix stopped at Jim's Grill, 418

South Main Street for something to eat. He

said he was in Jim's Grill for some time and

feels that he arrived there at approximately

4:30 p.m. and believes that he left between

5:15 p.m. and 5:30 p.m.

He said when he left, he picked up

his hat and he and Ray Hendrix paid their

check and left Jim's Grill. He said that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1082

they left the entrance of Jim's Grill and

proceeded north on South Main Street for 10

feet when Ray Hendrix remembered he left his

jacket in Jim's Grill. Mr. Reed stated he

waited in front of Jim's Grill while Hendrix

went back for his jacket.

He commented that while waiting, he

looked and saw a white Mustang was parked

near the entrance of Jim's Grill. Mr. Reed

stated he does not have a car and is in the

market for a car and was considering buying a

Mustang and therefore he looked this car

over. He said he believed the car was an off

white color, that it was not dirty but was

not exactly clean either.

He said he believes this car had not

been recently washed. He said he does not

recall the color of the interior but believes

that it was a dark color. He said he does

not recall seeing anything inside the car

other than five cartons lying on the back

seat. He described these cartons as being

the size of a tin package cigarette carton.

He said these cartons were red and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1083

white in color, but does not remember any

lettering on the cartons nor does he remember

whether the white or the red was dominant.

He said when he saw these cartons he felt

that the owner of this car was probably a

traveling salesman -- that the owner of this

car was probably a traveling salesman.

Mr. Reed stated he does not know

whether or not any stickers were in the

window of this car and he did not look at the

license. He said he does not recall if the

Mustang had whitewall tires and if it had

wheel covers.

Mr. Reed stated that after Hendrix

obtained his jacket from Jim's Grill, they

proceeded north on South Main and walked on

the east side of South Main Street. He said

when they arrived at the intersection of

Vance and South Main, he was about ready to

walk off the curb when for some unknown

reason he looked around to see if there were

any cars coming. He said as he looked back,

he saw a white Mustang about ready to turn

the corner and go east on Vance from South

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1084

Main Street.

He said he does not know if this is

the same car he saw parked in front of Jim's

Grill but added it seemed to be the same

car. He said he did not see who was in the

car but believes it was a white male with a

white shirt, but does not recall if this

individual had a tie or hat on. He said he

had the impression this person was not young

but was not old. He said he would have no

way of estimating the age of this person.

Mr. Reed said the Mustang proceeded east down

Vance Street. He has no idea where the car

went after it turned the corner.

Mr. Reed stated that he went to his

room and that he had been in his room for

quite some time, possibly as much as 15

minutes when he heard numerous sirens in the

immediate area going down toward Jim's

Grill. He said he learned later that Martin

Luther King had been shot and that the sirens

he heard were from officers going to that

immediate area.

Mr. Reed advised he could not

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1085

furnish any additional information concerning

any cars parked on the street or any people

in that immediate area.

Your Honor, we move that these

statements be marked as plaintiffs' exhibits.

THE COURT: You want to do them

as collective or marked separately?

MS. AKINS: They can be

collective, Your Honor.

THE COURT: Please mark them as

Collective 21.

(Whereupon, the above-mentioned

documents were marked as Collective Exhibit

21.)

THE COURT: Also, ladies and

gentlemen, the new face that you see with

Mr. Pepper and his group is Mr. Dick

Gregory. All right. Call your next witness.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you, Your

Honor. Your Honor, plaintiffs call

Lieutenant Willie B. Richmond.

WILLIE B. RICHMOND,

having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1086

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Richmond.

A. Good afternoon.

Q. Thank you for joining us here this

afternoon. Would you state your full name

and address for the record, please?

A. Willie B. Richmond.

Q. And your address?

A. 1411 Favell Drive, Memphis,

Tennessee.

Q. What is your present occupation,

Mr. Richmond?

A. I'm retired.

Q. And where were you employed

previously?

A. Memphis Police Department.

Q. And when did you first join the

Memphis Police Department?

A. February the 1st -- February the 2nd,

1965.

Q. Nineteen sixty --

A. Five.

Q. Five. And when did you officially

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1087

retire?

A. April 26, 1997.

Q. So you're a long-standing police

officer?

A. Thirty-two years.

Q. And what was your final rank?

A. Captain.

Q. You reached captain. Now, on the

occasion of the sanitation workers' strike in

February and March and April of 1968, during

those turbulent times, what was your

assignment in the police department?

A. I was assigned to the Internal

Affairs Bureau at that time during the

sanitation strike.

Q. Would you be kind enough just to pull

that mike a little closer to you?

A. (Witness complies.)

Q. You were assigned to internal

affairs?

A. That's correct.

Q. And what did that assignment entail?

What did it mean to be assigned to internal

affairs?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1088

A. Observe workers to see if any trouble

was going to come up.

Q. Did there come a time when you were

assigned to a surveillance post in the fire

station number two on South Main Street?

A. If that was the one that was at

Calhoun and Main, it was.

MR. PEPPER: All right. Why

don't we just pull that out so we refresh

Captain Richmond's memory.

(Map exhibit set up.)

MR. PEPPER: Permission to

enter, Your Honor?

THE COURT: Yes, sir.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Mr. Richmond, this is

the fire station we're talking about here

(indicating) which is on South Main on the

corner of Butler and South Main. Do you

recognize it?

A. Yeah, that's it. Butler and South

Main.

Q. All right. And where were you on

surveillance duty when you were assigned

here?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1089

A. I was in the back where the sleeping

quarters is next to Mulberry Street. There's

a sleeping quarters back there.

Q. Back here in the rear of the fire

station?

A. Right.

Q. And where were you looking in

particular during your surveillance duty?

A. I was looking at the parking lot area

to the Lorraine Motel.

Q. But from here across to the Lorraine

Motel?

A. Right.

Q. Do you recall when you started, when

you took up that position first?

A. That particular day, I had gone out

that morning -- but I came back -- to take a

blood test because I was getting married that

coming Sunday.

Q. All right.

A. And I went back down there later on

that evening about maybe 2:30, 3:00.

Q. You came back around 2:30, 3:00?

A. Correct.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1090

Q. And you then resumed your

surveillance?

A. Correct.

Q. Were you alone or did you have a

partner with you?

A. I had a partner.

Q. And who was that?

A. Detective Redditt.

Q. So the two of you shared that duty?

A. That is correct.

Q. Did there come a time that afternoon

when you were left alone on duty?

A. When I had finished my blood test, I

went back to the office, internal affair's

office, and I was told to go down to the

station to relieve Redditt because he had

been threatened.

Q. So you were told at that point to go

down to the station and relieve him. He was

going to be relieved of responsibility, taken

off?

A. Correct.

Q. And you were going to continue the

surveillance by yourself?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1091

A. That is correct.

Q. To whom did you report when you were

carrying out this surveillance activity?

A. I called the office and usually I

talked to -- it was then Captain Gerald Ray

or Inspector Time (phonetic), and I can't

remember which one I talked to now.

Q. But you would speak with one of those

two officers?

A. One of the two. Most of the time it

was Ray.

Q. Captain Richmond, let me pass this

report to you.

(Document passed to witness.)

Q. Do you recognize this document?

A. Well, it looks like the statement I

gave on April the 9th, 1968 to Lieutenant

J.D. Hamby.

Q. Right. This is a statement you gave

to Lieutenant J.D. Hamby on April 9th, 1968?

A. That is correct.

Q. Now, this retraces your activity on

this surveillance duty from April 3rd through

the assassination; is that correct?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1092

A. That is correct.

Q. If you'll turn over to page 2, we're

still on April 3rd. Is there anything of

particular notice or moment that's taken

place on April the 3rd that you can see?

A. No, sir, not in particular.

Q. You see a reference to the Invaders

about midway down that page? Reference to

the Invaders occupying rooms 315 and 316?

A. I see it.

Q. Were the Invaders of particular

interest to you at that time?

A. No, sir.

Q. You were just commenting that they

were there?

A. That's it.

Q. Now, when Dr. King arrived in the

city for that last visit, were you at the

airport?

A. I was.

Q. Did you have a conversation with

anyone connected with either his group or

with the local clergy having to do with

security or protection for him on that last

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1093

visit?

A. I didn't, but my partner did.

Q. Your partner did. Were you present

when that conversation was taking place?

A. I was there.

Q. And with whom was the conversation?

A. I believe he spoke with Reverend

Kyles.

Q. Reverend Samuel Kyles?

A. Right.

Q. And what was the gist of the

conversation with respect to security

protection for Dr. King?

A. At that time we was told that

Dr. King hadn't wanted any police protection.

Q. You were told that Dr. King didn't

want any protection.

A. Police protection.

Q. Any police protection. And this was

told to you in this conversation by Reverend

Kyles?

A. I think it was Reverend Kyles. I'm

not sure, but I believe it was Reverend

Kyles. He was the one that said it I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1094

believe.

Q. He was the one who said it you

believe?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. Were you familiar with what position

Reverend Kyles held in Dr. King's

organization?

A. No, I was not.

Q. And you didn't know he held no

position in Dr. King's organization?

A. I did not.

Q. If you'll move on to page 3 of your

statement, Captain Richmond, about two-thirds

of the way down the page, do you notice your

note? And I'll read it. "At 2:05 p.m.

Reverend Samuel Kyles arrived and went to

room 307 and departed at 2:23 p.m." You see

that note?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you know who was in room 307 at

that time?

A. Well, at that time, no, I did not.

Q. Let's move on to page 4, please.

A. (Witness complies.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1095

Q. The first full paragraph. Would you

read the first full paragraph starting at "at

approximately 5:50 p.m." to us, please?

A. Okay. It says, "Approximately 5:50

p.m., John Smith, Milton Max, Charles Cabbage

and one female colored and approximately six

or seven more of the Invaders opened the door

of their rooms, and I could see them

gathering their belongings. They then

brought them down the stairs and placed them

in the trunk of a light blue Mustang, license

number BL 3750, and they left the motel.

They was going west on Butler to Main."

Q. If I could just interrupt you there.

So at 5:50 p.m., your eye witness recording

sees the Invaders just bustling out of --

hustling out of that motel, leaving the

hotel?

A. They left.

Q. And that's within 11 minutes of the

shooting?

A. Approximately.

Q. Would you continue reading the next

paragraph, please?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1096

A. "Immediately after the Invaders left,

the Reverend Samuel Kyles came out of room

312 and went to the room where Martin Luther

King was living. He knocked on the door and

Martin Luther King came to the door. They

said a few words between each other and

Reverend Martin Luther King went back into

his room closing the door behind him, and the

Reverend Samuel Kyles remained on the porch."

Q. Right. So you're telling us there

from your eye witness report that Reverend

Kyles knocked on Martin Luther King's door at

about ten minutes to six or shortly after ten

minutes to six, said a few words to Dr. King

after he opened the door. Then when the door

was closed, Dr. King went back into his room

and Reverend Kyles remained on the -- you

call it the porch, but on the balcony?

A. The balcony.

Q. Now, a little further down in the

next paragraph, you record Martin Luther King

coming out onto the balcony. Do you see that

reference there? And if you could read from

the words "at this time the Reverend Martin

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1097

Luther King returned. " Do you see that?

A. I see it.

Q. Would you read that note, please?

Middle of the next paragraph.

A. Okay. "At this time Reverend Martin

Luther King returned from his room to the

gallery and walked up to the handrail. The

Reverend Kyles was standing off to his

right. This was approximately 6 p.m. At

this time I heard a loud sound as if it was a

shot and saw Doctor Martin Luther King fall

back on the handrail and put his hand up to

his head.

At 6:01 p.m., April 4th, 1968, I

reported this to the inspection bureau. I

returned to remain there and keep

surveillance. Also, here now and at the time

I heard the shot, the men of the tact squad

which consists of the sheriff deputy and the

Memphis police department was in the fire

house number four. I immediately hollered to

them I believe that King has been shot.

At this time the men of the tact

squad scramble out of the fire house

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1098

immediately going in all different

directions. Some went to the hotel. Some

went down the street. Later, the fire

department ambulance arrived approximately

five minutes later and departed to the

hospital with Reverend King."

Q. That's fine, you can stop there.

These were your recollections at the time

contemporaneously as you observed what was

going on at the Lorraine; is that right?

A. Correct.

Q. Nowhere in these notes do you record

Reverend Kyles going into Reverend King's

room 45 minutes, an hour before the shooting,

do you?

A. No, I don't.

Q. And if he had done so, is it fair to

say that you would have recorded this entry?

A. I recorded pretty much everything

that went on. I don't have my notebook now,

but we carried little small notebooks.

Q. Right.

A. And I wrote everything down as I saw

it.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1099

Q. As you saw it?

A. As I saw it.

Q. That was your duty.

A. Correct.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you very

much, Captain Richmond. Plaintiffs move

admission of Captain Richmond's report into

evidence, Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right, 22.

(Whereupon, the above-mentioned

document was marked as Exhibit 22.)

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Captain Richmond, let me ask you a

couple of questions. I notice on this same

report that you were just reading from you

were asked a question, did you see anything

suspicious, anyone acting boldly, and your

answer was that you did not see anyone acting

with suspicion or anyone that created any

concern to you; am I correct, sir?

A. That is correct. I didn't.

Q. Sir?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1100

A. I did not.

Q. You also were asked for your

impression of where the shot came from, and

you said it sounded to you like it came from

the northwest side of the fire station toward

the street side?

A. That's exactly where it sounded like

it came from to me.

Q. It sounded like the north/northwest

from the police station? That's what you

said in this report I believe.

A. Yes, uh-huh.

Q. And that's where you thought it came

from at first, isn't it?

A. I have no idea where it came from.

That's what it sounded like to me.

MR. GARRISON: That's all I

have.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further,

Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right. You may

stand down, sir. You can remain in the

courtroom or you're free to leave.

THE WITNESS: Thank you.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1101

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: Do you have a short

witness?

MR. PEPPER: I'm afraid not.

THE COURT: All right. Then

we'll take our lunch break and we'll resume

at 2:00.

(Jury out.)

(Lunch recess taken at 12:35 p.m.)

THE COURT: Bring the jury in,

please.

(Jury in at 2:15 p.m.)

THE COURT: All right. We're

ready to proceed.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you, Your

Honor. Your Honor, plaintiffs call as their

next witness Mr. Douglas Valentine.

DOUGLAS VALENTINE,

having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Valentine. Thank

you for making this journey, being with us

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1102

this afternoon. Would you please state for

the record your full name and address?

A. My name is Douglas Valentine, and I

live in Longmeadow, Massachusetts.

Q. Thank you. And what do you do for a

living, Mr. Valentine?

A. I'm a writer -- a twice published

writer.

Q. And what is your specialty of writing

and research?

A. The intelligence operations of the

United States Government.

Q. Would you tell us some of the books

that you have written?

A. I've had two books published. The

first was titled The Hotel Tacloban. It was

about my father's experiences as a prisoner

of war in World War II. That book was

published in 1984, '85 and '86. My second

book was called The Phoenix Program, and that

was published in 1990 and 1992.

Q. Would you summarize for us what the

scope and the concern of The Phoenix Program

was?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1103

A. The Phoenix Program was created by

the CIA in Vietnam in 1967 as part of a

recognition that the war could not be won

militarily and that a second other war had to

be waged against what was called the Vietcong

infrastructure which was a jargon for the

shadow government of the Vietcong.

Q. Now, in the course of your research

and work with respect to the Phoenix Program

and that book, did you come upon information

that has a bearing or is relevant to this

case?

A. Yes, I did. I interviewed hundreds

of people who participated in the Phoenix

Program, including military intelligence

personnel officers and enlisted men who were

assigned to the Phoenix Program in Vietnam.

Some of these military intelligence personnel

upon returning to the United States were

assigned to military intelligence groups in

the Continental United States and began to

conduct surveillance and Phoenix type

operations against anti-war demonstrators and

people in the Civil Rights Movement.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1104

Q. What was the range of activities that

these groups were involved in?

A. The military intelligence groups

actually had lists of prominent members of

the anti-war movement and the Civil Rights

Movement. Particularly they focused on

Vietnam veterans against the war, but they

had an entire range of targeted individuals

that they surveilled, including such

well-known people as Abbie Hoffman and Jerry

Rubin. But they also acted as agent

provocateurs in demonstrations that would

insight riots at demonstrations in order that

the police could be called in and arrest

individuals.

Q. And break up demonstrations?

A. Break up demonstrations that the

military intelligence personnel had started,

some of the problems that they had started

themselves.

Q. Now, the military intelligence

structure covered the entire Continental

United States, did it not?

A. That's right. There were seven

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1105

military intelligence groups in the

Continental United States spread pretty much

evenly across the country.

Q. And the one that was connected with

this region in the southeast was the 111th

military intelligence group?

A. That's correct.

Q. Was there any particular information

that you happened to come upon with respect

to the 111?

A. Yes, and I included a passage in my

book in The Phoenix Program about that. One

of the intelligence -- military intelligence

individuals who had been in the Phoenix

Program in Vietnam came back to the United

States afterwards and worked in a military

intelligence group -- another one, not the

111. But there was common knowledge within

all of the military intelligence groups about

each other's activities.

And this individual heard a rumor at

the time that the 111th military intelligence

group had been conducting 24-hour a day

surveillance of Martin Luther King and that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1106

they had actually been in Memphis on April

4th, 1968 and had taken photographs of the

assassination of Martin Luther King.

Q. So the scuttlebutt or the rumor was

that there had been 111th military

intelligence group officers in Memphis at the

time of the assassination in a vantage point

with cameras running?

A. That's right.

Q. And that they actually captured the

assassination on film?

A. That's correct.

Q. Have any of those photographs ever

surfaced to the best of your knowledge?

A. Not to my knowledge.

Q. Did you speak with more than one

source with respect to their existence?

A. No, I did not. I spoke with one

source.

Q. With one source. Now, could you give

us an overview of another intelligence group,

the 902nd military intelligence group and

what you learned about that organization?

A. I thought I knew a lot. I thought I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1107

knew almost everything about the various

military intelligence groups, but I didn't

learn about the 902nd until 1996 in the

course of researching the book that I'm

writing now which is a book about federal

drug law enforcement. And I did an

individual -- an interview with an individual

named Phillip Manual who in 1975 was a staff

investigator for the Senate Subcommittee on

Permanent Investigations.

And in the course of interviewing

Mr. Manual, I asked him about his background,

and he said he had been in the 902nd military

intelligence group. So in the course of my

interview with him, this was interesting to

me so we temporarily digressed from the

subject that I was interviewing him about and

he explained -- I asked him about the 902nd,

and he refused to discuss the subject. He

said it was a very secret organization and he

had promised not to talk about it.

So I subsequently filed a Freedom of

Information Act request for information about

the 902nd. And I filed that Freedom of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1108

Information Act request in October of 1996,

and I received a unit history from the United

States Army on the 902nd. And that's --

having read that unit history is basically

the extent of my knowledge of the 902nd.

Q. Right. That was published by the

Department of Defense?

A. By the United States Army, and it was

published in 1994 as a 50-year anniversary

unit history. The 902nd was created in 1944,

and this history was written in 1994 as a

50-year commemorative exercise.

Q. Do you know where the 902nd military

intelligence group was based in 1968?

A. I believe it was based in Washington

D.C.

Q. Do you know that Mr. Phillip Manual

was here in Memphis on April 4th, 1968?

A. I know that, yes.

Q. Do you know what his role was here in

Memphis on April 4, 1968?

A. What I know about his role here, I

gathered from having read Orders to Kill Him

(sic).

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1109

Q. What did you gather was his role?

A. That he had arrived in Memphis I

believe on April 3rd, and on April 4th at

3:00 -- between 3:00 and 4:00 p.m., he met

with a lieutenant from the Memphis Police

Department. And I believe that man's name

was Arkin. And based on what Mr. Manual told

Lieutenant Arkin, Lieutenant Arkin went to

the fire station where a Memphis Police

Department officer named Redditt was

stationed and was observing the Lorraine

Hotel, and Lieutenant Arkin asked that

Mr. Redditt leave his post and return to

police headquarters.

Q. Have you subsequently tried to locate

Mr. Phillip Manual?

A. Yes, I have.

Q. Have you had any success in finding

him?

A. No, I have not.

Q. Any trace of him whatsoever?

A. None whatsoever.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you. Nothing

further, Your Honor.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1110

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Mr. Valentine, you said at

some -- the 111th was photographing the

assassination? Is that information you

obtained?

A. That's what I was told, yes.

Q. Did anyone ever tell you who the

assassin was? Did they determine that?

A. Nobody ever told me who the assassin

was.

MR. GARRISON: Thank you.

MR. PEPPER: Just one further,

Your Honor.

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Mr. Valentine, did you ever ascertain

what was the actual vantage point from which

those photographs were taken in your own

investigative work?

A. No, but what I was -- I'm sorry.

Q. From your own personal investigative

work, your own knowledge, did you ever

ascertain that?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1111

A. No, I did not.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you very

much. Nothing further.

(Witness excused.)

MR. PEPPER: Plaintiffs call

next Mr. Carthel Weeden.

CARTHEL WEEDEN,

having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Weeden.

A. Good afternoon.

Q. Thank you for joining us here today.

A. Okay.

Q. Would you state for the record,

please, your full name and address?

A. Carthel Weeden, 6732 Tunger Ridge

Drive, Olive Branch, Mississippi.

THE COURT: Could you please

spell Carthel?

A. C A R T H E L.

THE COURT: Thank you, sir.

A. Need me to spell Weeden?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1112

W E E D E N.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Mr. Weeden, what do

you currently do for a living?

A. I got a little construction company.

Q. Are you basically retired?

A. Well, I am from one job.

Q. What is the job that you're retired

from, Mr. Weeden?

A. Memphis Fire Department.

Q. And when did you join the Memphis

Fire Department?

A. 1951.

Q. When did you retire?

A. July 7, 1982.

Q. That's a long career.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. What was your position from beginning

to end in the Memphis Fire Department?

A. I started as a private. I finished

as a district chief.

Q. So you went all the way --

A. I went all the way through the ranks.

Q. All the way up.

A. Yes, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1113

Q. And in 1968, where were you

stationed?

A. Fire station number two.

Q. Fire station number two.

A. Main and Butler.

MR. PEPPER: We're going to put

up the graphic just so we fix this location.

(Map exhibit set up.)

THE WITNESS: I guess I'll have

to put on these to be able to see that far.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor, may I

approach?

THE COURT: You may.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Mr. Weeden, this is

the downtown Mulberry Street/South Main

Street area. Can you see this all right?

A. Yeah, I can see.

Q. And there's the corner of

Butler -- Mulberry, Butler and then South

Main Street (indicating).

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And here of course is the Lorraine

Motel.

A. Yes, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1114

Q. East of -- and over in here is

Memphis Fire Station number two.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Is that the fire station where you

were stationed in 1968?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And what was your position when you

were at that station?

A. Captain.

Q. So you were captain?

A. Yeah, of the station.

Q. Of the station.

A. Yeah.

Q. That means you were the senior --

A. I was senior captain, yeah.

Q. Senior captain and administrative

officer of the station?

A. Right.

Q. Right. Now, these were very

turbulent times in 1968, in early 1968, were

they not?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you have all kinds of police

units and other individuals around the fire

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1115

station?

A. They were in and out, yes.

Q. On April 4th, 1968, the day of the

assassination, were you on duty?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And on April 4, 1968, were you

approached by two Army officers?

A. That's what they indicated, they were

two Army officers.

Q. And what did they ask you to do?

A. They wanted a look-out vantage for

the Lorraine Hotel.

Q. They wanted a vantage point of the

Lorraine Hotel, these Army officers. And did

you put them somewhere?

A. I put them on the roof of the number

two fire station.

Q. You put these Army officers on the

roof of the number two fire station on the

4th of April, 1968?

A. In the morningtime.

Q. They came in the morningtime?

A. Right.

Q. Did you see them leave?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1116

A. No, sir.

Q. Did you go up there on the roof with

them?

A. I did.

Q. And were they carrying anything?

A. They had some briefcases or some

items with them, yes.

Q. Did you come to learn what was in

those briefcases?

A. No, sir.

Q. Did they tell you what was in the

briefcases?

A. They said they wanted a vantage point

for doing some photo -- photograph --

Q. Photographic work.

A. Right, right.

Q. So you came to believe that they had

camera equipment in those briefcases, did you

not?

A. Well, that's what they had indicated

to me. I placed them on the roof and then

left.

Q. Approaching again, can you tell us

roughly or exactly on that roof which vantage

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1117

point were they occupying?

A. They was near that -- I guess it

would be the northeast corner there.

Q. The northeast corner of the roof?

A. Yeah. That's where they was placed.

There's a hose tie right there by that.

Q. Right.

A. Yeah, and of course as you approach

up on the roof, you can walk to the edge and

look right down on the street.

Q. So it's a clear vantage point, isn't

it?

A. It's a clear vantage point. There's

a parapet, a wall that was there, but it's

very small. It's about that high

(indicating).

Q. Would anything impede their visual

view --

A. No, sir.

Q. -- their lens view of the Lorraine or

the brush area here?

A. It could all be seen from that

vantage point. It could have been whatever

they wanted to do. It would nothing be in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1118

it -- keep it from being a vantage point to

do what they had indicated to me they wanted

to watch.

Q. Right. So there would have been

nothing blocking their --

A. No, shouldn't have been at all. But

if I remember correctly, it was a hedge, you

know, there on I guess it would be north of

the fire station in that parking lot area

there. Hedge had been grown up there. Well,

they wasn't very big trees.

Q. But they were above that?

A. Yeah, they were above the fence row

there.

Q. Did you stay with them for any period

of time?

A. No, sir.

Q. You just left them?

A. I placed them at a vantage point that

they seemed to like and left them.

Q. You left them to do their task,

whatever it was?

A. Right.

Q. Did they at the time show you any

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1119

military identification?

A. Well, I'm sure they did or I wouldn't

have carried them up there but I -- you know,

we had a lot of people coming in and out at

that time, you know.

Q. Sure.

A. We was trying to do our best to do

what they wanted to be done.

Q. I'm sure you would. Mr. Weeden, has

any law enforcement officers ever asked you

about that day and what you did?

A. No, sir.

Q. Nobody has ever spoken to you?

A. No, sir.

Q. Does that seem strange to you? You

were the captain of that fire station in such

a critical position.

A. You want me to answer that or just --

Q. You can answer.

A. Yeah. I don't know what to say

except I was there.

Q. And you've never been spoken to about

this?

A. No, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1120

Q. Did any member of the House Select

Committee on Assassinations, any investigator

for the House Select Committee ever speak to

you about this incident?

A. Not at all.

Q. Any researchers or book writers ever

speak to you about this incident?

A. No, sir.

Q. My, my. Thank you very much,

Mr. Weeden.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Mr. Weeden, you had been stationed at

the fire station sometime on April 4, 1968 I

guess; is that correct?

A. Do what, sir? I didn't hear you.

Q. You had been stationed at the fire

station sometime on April the 4th of 1968; is

that correct?

A. At that time I had been there

approximately a couple years.

Q. All right, sir. Had you ever been in

a place called Jim's Grill? Had you ever

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1121

been in that establishment?

A. Not except for maybe an inspection.

We did make, you know, inspections back

then. I think we had had a card on it. I'm

sure I had been in it, but not for any other

purpose.

Q. Had you ever heard the name of

Mr. Jowers mentioned at any time --

A. No, sir.

Q. -- before this occurred?

A. No, sir.

Q. And now, let me ask you something.

You were at the fire station on the day of

the assassination; am I correct, sir?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. In fact, you were over on the balcony

for just a very short time, weren't you?

A. You're talking about that I carried

the guys on the roof?

Q. No, sir. When Dr. King was shot, you

were on the balcony there where he was shot

for just a few moments?

A. I went across to help the ambulance

back up to pick him up.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1122

Q. In fact, I believe you told me that

you helped put his body onto the stretcher?

A. We did. We loaded him on the

stretcher.

Q. Let me ask you this. When you first

arrived up on the balcony where he had been

shot, was anyone there?

A. Well, there was people around but...

Q. Was anyone trying to do anything for

him?

A. Not as I remember.

Q. Now, did you see the wound where he

was shot?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. All right. You examined it pretty

closely?

A. No, sir, I just...

Q. But you did see the wound where he

had been shot?

A. I did see the wound.

Q. Could you tell, Mr. Weeden, if it

appeared that that wound went up or down in

his area where he was shot?

A. In my opinion, it went up.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1123

Q. And that's from what you could see

there?

A. Right.

Q. Did you stay there until --

A. Until the ambulance -- we loaded him

up and they carried him away.

MR. GARRISON: That's all.

Thank you.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further,

Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right. You may

stand down, sir.

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: Call your next

witness.

MR. PEPPER: Plaintiffs call

Reverend Walter Fauntroy.

WALTER E. FAUNTROY,

having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Reverend Fauntroy, thank you for

joining us this afternoon.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1124

A. Thank you.

Q. Would you state your full name and

address for the record, please?

A. My name is Walter E. Fauntroy. I

live at 4105 17th Street in Washington D.C.

Q. Reverend Fauntroy, would you tell the

Court and the jury of your association with

Martin Luther King, Junior?

A. Well, for the past 40 years I've been

the pastor of my home church in Washington

D.C. Ten of those years was spent as

director of the Washington Bureau of the

Southern Christian Leadership Conference

where I had responsibility for relating to

the agencies of the federal government that

had relevance for our struggle in the decade

of the sixties -- the White House, the

Congress, the Department of Justice in large

measure, and the Interstate Commerce

Commission in the sixties.

The decade of the seventies and

eighties were spent as a member of the

Congress of the United States where, again,

some background of my work with Dr. King in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1125

organizing the march on Washington in '63 and

the Voting Rights Act March of 1965 and the

Meredith Freedom March from Memphis to

Mississippi to Jackson in '66 had prepared me

for 20 years of working the Congress where my

first goal was to achieve home rule from the

District of Columbia which we were able to

achieve in the year 1974. And thereafter, I

went to work on a second goal which I had in

going to the Congress and that was to have

the House of Representatives investigate the

assassination of Martin Luther King, Junior.

Q. And that became a serious undertaking

of yours, the formation of this

investigation?

A. It certainly did. I had gone through

what we now know to be the infamous counter

intelligence operation that the FBI ran on

Dr. King called Telepro. And I had never

been satisfied that the explanation given for

the assassination of Dr. King, namely, that

one man by himself was able to get out of

jail and follow Dr. King as he did along the

routes which we later traced, shoot him and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1126

leave Memphis and make his way to Canada and

there get the passports of three persons who

looked like him in route to Southern Rhodesia

to join the militia. It never made since to

me.

And one of my colleagues on the

banking committee, Henry B. Gonzales of

Texas, had the same view with respect to the

assassination of President Kennedy that it

didn't make sense. And we teamed up to

introduce a resolution that called upon the

U.S. House of Representatives establishing a

select committee to investigate those

Assassinations. And I became chair of the

committee investigating Dr. King's

assassination.

Q. So you as a congressman became the

chairman of the subcommittee that dealt with

the King assassination?

A. That's true.

Q. And you chaired that subcommittee

throughout the entirety of the investigation?

A. Without question.

Q. And when did that investigation

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1127

actually begin?

A. As a matter of fact, it didn't get

really under way until six months after the

Congress had authorized it. That because the

staff director of our choice, a prosecutor by

the name Richard Sprague, whom we had

selected because of the excellent work he had

done in Pennsylvania in prosecuting and

bringing about the conviction of Mr.

Fitsimmons who was the president of the

Teamsters who had been accused and then

convicted of having his predecessor killed.

Mr. Sprague was a very thorough prosecutor

and not long after we hired him and he went

to work, there developed a very serious

controversy about his conduct of the initial

days of the investigation that delayed us

about six months.

Q. What was the nature of the conduct of

Dick Sprague that caused controversy?

A. As I recall, it was a disagreement

between him and the chairman of the Full

Committee, Mr. Gonzales, that was resolved by

Mr. Gonzales resigning as the chair and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1128

Mr. Sprague being dismissed as the chief of

staff.

As I recall, the controversy had to

do with his intent to make available to the

committee all records, not only the FBI, but

the CIA and military intelligence which

became quite controversial for some people,

not for me.

Q. So Dick Sprague wanted to have all of

these files available to the committee --

military intelligence, CIA, FBI records. He

wanted them available for your investigation

and that was met with controversy?

A. It was met with controversy. It

never surfaced as the heart of the

controversy. There seemed to be some

personality problems that, quite frankly, I'm

not competent to deal with with respect to

Mr. Gonzales. But Mr. Gonzales resigned.

Mr. Sprague was fired and Mr. Blakey was

hired and we finally got to work about in

August of that year.

Q. At the time Mr. Sprague was making

his request for these unexpurgated materials,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1129

was there a media campaign that went on

against him?

A. Quite frankly I can't remember, but I

found him to be a very thorough and affable

person and one who I had looked forward to

giving us the kind of staff direction that I

thought was necessary.

Q. So we're six months down the road and

now you're investigation starts.

A. Yes. I mentioned that because when

we were forced to bring the investigation to

an end -- and the Congress works on two-year

cycles -- we admittedly concluded our

investigation without having thoroughly

investigated all of the evidence that was

apparent.

Q. Why did you conclude the

investigation without looking at all of the

evidence?

A. Because there were not the votes in

the House of Representatives to extend into

the next Congress, an appropriation to allow

us to continue. I think had we had the six

months, we may well have gotten to the bottom

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1130

of everything.

Q. You think you would have done a

better job if you had more time?

A. Oh, without a question, yes. As a

matter of fact, I came away from the

investigation with the view that we had not

explored a number of leads that were apparent

to us. In the first instance, we had not

been able to identify any credible witness

who placed James Earl Ray at the scene. We

had not been able to establish that the gun

which was fired at Dr. King was fired from

the window above, and quite frankly, we had

evidence in my judgment which was credible

from three persons whose views were that the

gunshot came from the bushes below. Nor had

we been able to trace the bullet that entered

Dr. King's body to the gun which had

Mr. Ray's fingerprints on it.

And of course it was almost amusing

when we examined Mr. Ray -- and I sat through

hours of cross-examination of him -- that

Mr. Ray was really competent to be able to

carry out the operation of breaking out of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1131

jail and traveling around the country and

getting a hold of roughly $10,000 to sustain

himself during that period and of course get

-- there was three passports all by himself

without some help. I was disturbed also

because while he could not hit a target a

hundred feet away with an M-1 rifle, the

marksman or the person who shot Dr. King

obviously was able to do that from about 200

feet away so that these were questions on our

minds.

There was a fellow by the name of

John Paul Speaker who had been suggested as

the person who may have informed Mr. Ray of a

$50,000 offer that had been made to his

brother-in-law, a young man by the name of

Russell Byers, by two men, Kauffmann

and -- John Kauffmann and John Sutherland.

The result of -- we never had a chance to

trace that thoroughly, although the committee

concluded that there may have been a low

level conspiracy since we had not been able

to determine that and we were never able to

get Mr. Speaker to speak.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1132

And we turned all of that

information over to the FBI with a request to

the Justice Department with a request that

they follow up on those and other deeds that

had many of us with reservations about

closing the investigation.

Q. Were you uncomfortable with the

conclusions of the investigation?

A. I was uncomfortable with the

conclusion that it appeared that James Earl

Ray acted alone, had killed Dr. Martin Luther

King, Junior. I was uncomfortable for

several reasons. One was that we were

never -- I was never satisfied with the

conclusion on whether there was a Raul or

not a Raul. It appeared, as I recall, that

of the $10,000 that -- and that's about

$40,000 now in 1998 (sic) terms. The

$10,000 -- about $7,000 or more of it was

untraceable, and Mr. Ray's testimony had been

that Mr. Raul had given him that money in

return for his gun running as a part of an

underworld operation and so that troubled

me.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1133

And of course I was troubled with

Mr. Speaker who was at the time or had been

convicted of having killed a person with

malice aforethought and for pay and had spent

only about two or three years in jail.

Q. Wasn't there a consideration by the

committee that Mr. Ray may have gotten the

money from a robbery of a bank in Alton,

Illinois?

A. As a matter of fact, the staff gave

us three possible scenarios. One was that

Ray had received it from Raul, but we had

only evidence -- only evidence you had of the

existence of a Raul was Ray's testimony and

we had no credible evidence at that time that

such a person existed. The second was that

he might have robbed banks during the course

of that period, and we were satisfied that

that was not an option because the FBI had

itself thoroughly researched that and

concluded that there were no known robberies

that Ray could have been associated with.

The third option was that a bank

which he and his brothers robbed in Alton,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1134

Illinois had been the source of about

$27,000, about nine of which would have gone

to James Earl Ray, but again, we had only

hearsay. There was no conviction or no

judgment that they had in fact robbed the

bank and had been punished therefore.

Q. In fact, isn't it true that the

police chief of Alton, Illinois and the

president of the bank said that the Ray

brothers were never suspects?

A. That is what I heard, and again, not

having the opportunity to investigate and

corroborate a number of statements, we just

didn't have time to finish up.

Q. Since the conclusion of the House

Select Committee's investigation, have you

developed more information of your own

knowledge and have you had further thoughts?

A. I have not developed information on

my own, but I have been impressed with a

number of persons that I consider to be

providing us with scientific and reliable and

objective and verifiable data that would be

worthy of investigation. I was appalled

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1135

quite frankly at reading a book by Mr. Garrow

on the FBI and Martin Luther, Junior, which

detailed in far more graphic terms than we

had come to know in the committee. The

extent of J. Edgar Hoover's hatred for

Dr. King and the determined effort that he

and the FBI made to, quote, remove him from

the scene.

As I recall, we had concluded as a

committee -- well, this is not a conclusion

that I think was written, but our staff

director shared with me -- Mr. Blakey shared

with me the fact that he felt we could

develop a case for negligent homicide against

the FBI in terms of the climate created by

the FBI that made it almost inevitable that

someone would attempt to take his life.

There was a book by a Curt Gentry

written about 1981 which really upset me. It

described -- it was called J. Edgar Hoover

and His Secrets -- the Man and His Secrets.

And it dealt with a connection that he

established between J. Edgar Hoover, Carlos

Marcellas of the Mafia and two Texas business

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1136

people, Kirk -- Clint Merchaser and E.L.

Hunt, which brought to mind particularly the

testimony of a gentleman by the name of

McFerran who had said that he had overheard a

gentleman by the name of Laberto shouting

over the phone that afternoon. You know,

kill him, kill him on the balcony. And I was

really upset about that during the

investigation and had been assured that

really it was just Mr. Laberto's word against

Mr. McFerran's word.

Q. You're saying your committee's staff

assured you that as chairman of that

subcommittee that it was only Mr. Laberto's

word against Mr. McFerran's word and that

there was nothing else?

A. There was nothing to corroborate on

either side.

Q. What they told you --

A. That's what -- that's what we

concluded, and it troubled me as with many

aspects of this case because we had

difficulty finding corroborating evidence of

what seemed on the surface to be the fact. I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1137

mean anyone who talked with James Earl Ray

knew that he wasn't a rocket scientist and

knew that this level of sophistication could

not have been made available unless he had

had the kind of sophistication that I know

the Mafia has and that our intelligence

agencies have from time to time.

Q. So the intervening years after the

committee concluded its work, issued its

report in 1979, you've maintained an interest

in the case and have continued to read on

your own and digest research that's been

done; is that right?

A. Yes, against the background of having

gone through it with him.

Q. Yes.

A. And I was with him many times when it

was apparent that we were dealing with very

sophisticated forces.

Q. And what was the nature of those

sophisticated forces in terms of their impact

on the movement as you saw it?

A. Well, let me just say this because it

is a point of interest. When I assembled my

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1138

staff and learned about bugging and about

surveillance as its practiced by the FBI, I

took an interest in my own church and my own

phone at home and asked them if they would

not find somebody who could check my phones

out.

And I recall in the sixties one of

my members who worked as a maid offering me a

television set. Well, in the sixties, you

know, I didn't have a television set at the

church so I said I'd like to have one, and

she gave me a television set. That was a

lovely set. It was a black-and-white set.

It stayed in my office throughout the sixties

and even while I was in Congress.

And when the people went through my

office, they found a bug on it that enabled

persons to drive around the block of the

church and pick up anything that was going on

in the church. Well, that was sort of

amusing, but it sort of signaled me what we

joked about a lot in the sixties, namely

that, you know, Uncle Bubba is listening -- I

mean J. Edgar Hoover is listening. So that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1139

was amusing, and I learned also that there

was a bug in my phone at home that wore out

about three years. A fellow told me it talks

about 500 hours, and I do recall that every

time the phone would get a little funny, I

would call and the same fella would show up

to repair it so those kinds of laughable

things were sort of in my mind.

Q. Formed a pattern?

A. Yes.

Q. Right. Well, Reverend Fauntroy, if

you were uncomfortable at the time of the

conclusion of the investigation after all the

time that's elapsed and all that you've

thought and considered since then, how do you

feel now about the results of that

investigation?

A. Well, of course two things have

really perked my interest, and that was an

article done here in Memphis in the

Commercial Appeal by Stephen Tompkins which

brought a lot of things into focus that I

think would bear thorough investigation

indeed had we known them at the time or had

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1140

any inkling that those things were in fact

even talked about, we would have followed

those leads. The fact that I had never heard

of this 902 group, military intelligence

group here before reading that article.

I had sensed that military

intelligence may have had some surveillance

role on African American leaders over the

years, but what Mr. Tompkins laid out in

terms of the perception by some people in the

country that blacks were ripe for subversion

by the Kaiser, by the communists and that

leadership had been under surveillance like

that, it really perked my interest anew in

whether or not we knew all that happened

before and on April the 4th, 1964 (sic).

Q. The Tompkins article is in evidence

in this case already.

A. Oh, good.

Q. Did your committee ever receive any

information, any evidence at all to consider

with respect to the involvement of military

intelligence and these activities?

A. To my recollection, not at all.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1141

Q. Did your committee ever receive any

information at all, any records at all,

documents with respect to the involvement of

the Central Intelligent Agency in this

instance?

A. Absolutely not to my recollection.

Q. Did your committee ever receive

unexpurgated files, surveillance and other

files of information from the Federal Bureau

of Investigation with respect to this event?

A. We received so many files from the

FBI, I just -- you'd have to be more

specific.

Q. I'm talking about unexpurgated field

reports with respect to surveillance

activities and --

A. No, no. No indications that

government was paying any more special

attention to Dr. King or our movement or to

my church study.

Q. On your new black and white

television set. Reverend Fauntroy, I mean

this is exactly what prosecutor Dick Sprague

wanted to accomplish for the committee,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1142

wasn't it, the opening up of these types of

files?

A. Quite frankly, you know, I've never

talked to Mr. Sprague since that time, but I

do know that one of the things that got him

in trouble was that he wanted to open that

whole area up. And there was lot of

publicity about that.

Q. You were chairman of the

subcommittee, Blakey was council Total

Committee. Why was that area not opened up

to the best of your knowledge at this point

in time?

A. Quite frankly, I cannot remember. I

cannot -- I want to -- after reading the

Tompkins article, I wanted to kick myself.

Q. This Court and jury have heard

evidence that there were photographers

surveilling the Lorraine Motel and that

immediate area at the time of the killing,

heard evidence that there was photographic

surveillance in place, military officers.

Did you ever hear anything of that sort?

A. Not at all, and had I heard it,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1143

believe me, we would have been on that case.

MR. PEPPER: Reverend Fauntroy,

thank you very much. Nothing further.

THE COURT: Cross-exam.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Let me ask you, Reverend Fauntroy, a

question or two. Do you know what

specifically led the committee to the

conclusion that James Earl Ray was the

assassin and acted alone? Was there anything

specific you recall now that led to this

conclusion?

A. I think the thing that was persuasive

for most members was the number of

contradictions in Mr. Ray's description of

what happened on that day and before with

respect to Raul and with respect to what he

did. I do recall as well that there were

persons who testified that they did not see

Mr. Ray at the gas station, for example, when

the word had been that he had been at the gas

station and others had seen him. The

witnesses who were identified turned out not

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1144

to be credible or denied that they were there

and had what appeared to be credible stories

as to where they were at the time so that the

propensity in the record of Mr. Ray to

contradict himself tended to weigh on the

side of the option that -- there were options

that were given us about Raul and about

where the money came from.

Q. You mentioned about the hatred of the

FBI for Dr. King. What do you recall about

that statement from them?

A. Well, I do remember something that

very much disturbed me, and I was director of

the Washington bureau so I got most of the

information. There were cartoons done after

Dr. King's speech on April the 7th, 1967 --

April the 4th, 1967, a year to the day before

he was killed. There were editorials. There

were cartoons suggesting that Dr. King was a

danger to the American way, that he was an

ally of the communists, that something needed

to be done about him.

It was on the basis of those kinds

of articles that were crafted in the FBI in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1145

their offices and then fed out to a network

of stations and newspapers that really made

discussion of a December the 23rd, 1963 memo

that had been circulated among FBI personnel

calling them to a meeting to discuss what

they were going to do to remove Martin Luther

King from the national scene. And it was on

the basis of that information that Mr. Blakey

confided with me that a case for negligent

homicide could be developed on the basis of

the evidence we had on what the FBI did to

create a climate and to persuade the public

that Martin Luther King was a danger to the

American way.

Q. You remember specifically anything in

your statements by J. Edgar Hoover that he

made about Dr. King and his work?

A. I certainly do. I remember

statements that resulted. He said that

Dr. King was the most notorious liar in the

country, and that prompted Dr. King, Andy

Young, myself and Ralph Abernathy to have a

meeting with Mr. Hoover in Washington at his

office. And he never answered the question

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1146

why he said it. As a matter of fact, he

spent most of the time explaining to us how

efficient the FBI was and how thorough they

were and how many black people they had

hired, but he never answered that question

and we went away amused. We thought maybe he

thought that we might really go off on him in

the room there, but, no, he never answered

those questions.

Q. Despite of all that, Reverend

Fauntroy, who did the United States

government assign to investigate the

assassination?

A. Well, it is the responsibility of the

federal government of the FBI to do that and

they did. And we took into account all that

they did. One of the things that we -- for

example, we never -- I never knew about James

Russell Byers from the FBI investigation. As

a matter of fact, one of my staffers came

down to Memphis, see, and found it in the

records that this man had said that he had

been offered $50,000 and that he had been in

the habit of taking stolen goods over to a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1147

hotel here and that two gentlemen, James

Kauffmann -- John Kauffmann and John

Sutherland, had something called fix-a-cold

cough medicine that turned out to be drugs

that they were making. But we found a great

many -- we didn't know about John --

Mr. Speaker, John Paul Speaker, who was

allegedly a cell mate of James Earl Ray and

believed to have suggested to him there was

$50,000 out there for anybody who would

assassinate Martin Luther King, Junior.

Q. Did the committee ever find any

indication that there was a person called

Raul that was in James Earl Ray's life?

A. They never -- we were never able to

establish the existence of a Raul or

corroboration from anybody that a Raul

existed. Jerry and John, James Earl Ray's

brothers, suggested that they knew that their

brother was in touch with somebody that he

called Raul, but it was all hearsay coming

from the brother.

There was some indications -- and I

can't remember the details of it. It sort of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1148

reminds me of the Jowers case, but there was

a hotel manager in California who recalled

James Earl Ray getting a call on the 27th or

30th of March telling him to go to Birmingham

and that they had -- they had seen this man

before with him, but we never tied that down.

MR. GARRISON: Thank you, sir.

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Reverend Fauntroy, did you ever see a

photograph -- did your staff ever show you a

photograph of a man whom James Earl Ray

identified as Raul in November of 1978?

A. No, they did not, although I have

seen a photo since then.

Q. Why wouldn't they have shown you that

photograph?

A. You know, I just don't know. It may

well have been that our staff was not aware

of what Mr. Tompkins stated some years

later. It may -- I know that our staff knew

nothing about the Loyd Jowers connection.

Q. Now, I'm just dealing with this Raul

issue.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1149

A. Yeah.

Q. What I'm getting to with the point of

hindsight and the advantage of hindsight is

the question of how that committee formed

with millions of taxpayers' dollars -- and

I'm taking you really as a prisoner of the

staff of that committee in a sense because

you were chairman. You didn't conduct the

investigation yourself. How the committee

staff could not locate a figure whom James

Earl Ray himself identified only one time

from a photograph that he saw in '78 which

the person 21 years later has been identified

by four other people independently as Raul,

why the staff couldn't do that job or why it

has to be done privately?

A. I wish I could answer that question.

And on hindsight as I said after I've seen

the work of so many scholars who have been

working in these areas, I wish I had known

and I wonder what our staff new.

Q. The other area that interests me is

your recollection of the reaction in the

country to Martin Luther King's speech at

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1150

Riverside on April 4, 1967 when he formally

holds no holds bar opposed the war in

Vietnam. Do you recall what the reaction was

across the land?

A. It was at that point that these

editorials, these cartoons began to appear

around the country and because, again, my

responsibility was for the national office

there in Washington, I got to get regular

versions of the same editorial -- this man is

dangerous and regular caricatures of a man

whom I considered the singularly most

important man with a most important message

for this, the most violent century in the

history of mankind. It was we've got to

learn to live together as brothers, and so it

hurt me.

And the effect of it was their

organization found many of its supporters

refusing thereafter to contribute to our

effort, and I do remember one call that I'll

never forget from Dr. King at a time when he

was very discouraged about what had happened

because he had taken a position that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1151

conscious told him was right. And it was on

an evening when I was just finishing up a

sermon for the next day and quoted to him an

English Methodist preacher who said on some

issues, cowards ask the question is it safe

to take a position, and expediency asks the

question is it politics, and vanity asks the

question is it popular, but conscious always

asks the question is it right.

And I said to Martin there are some

things you have to do not because they're

popular or politics but because they are

right, and I think that sort of helped him

through that period and we survived it.

Q. Was there a similar reaction of fear

with the announcement of the march on

Washington, the one that was planned in

April -- not April but in the spring of '68,

the poor people's campaign?

A. Yes, but I tell you, I was shocked by

the killing. I was shocked because we had

lived for about a decade to that time with

threats to Dr. King on his life. In fact, in

New York City, he had been stabbed by a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1152

demented woman, but it had become sort of

routine just to dismiss those kinds of

threats. It just never occurred to me that

the prospect of our doing not a one-day march

on Washington, but as Dr. King promised, a

demonstration that would last until this

nation ended a war in Vietnam and got serious

about the war on poverty. So that there was

talk about the risks, but really that was not

the question.

The question for us was whether or

not there might be provocateurs who would

deliberately start things, and quite frankly,

the reason we came back to Memphis was

precisely because we feared that if we did

not settle it here and make it very clear

that we were not going to brook any violence

as a part of our demonstration in Washington,

that we might not be able to carry it out

because Dr. King was determined that we're

not going to have a demonstration that

degenerates into violence.

Q. Lastly, Reverend Fauntroy, did there

come a time in 1977 when you became aware of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1153

a threat on James Earl Ray's life?

A. Oh, certainly. In 1977, not long

after we had gotten into the investigation in

earnest, we heard that Mr. Ray had broken out

of the prison here in Tennessee.

Q. Brushy Mountain Penitentiary?

A. Yes, which was very troubling because

I was afraid that perhaps persons who feared

he was telling the truth might want to take

his life. As a matter of fact, we were so

concerned about it that a former colleague of

mine in my first year of the Congress, Ray

Blanton, had left Congress and had become

governor of this state, and I suggested to

our chairman, Mr. Stokes, that we call him

and ask him that he make sure that every

effort was being made by the state to capture

Mr. Ray before some people from the FBI who

were reported to us to be down here on a

state matter.

Q. And in fact, weren't there upwards of

30 FBI SWAT team snipers that descended on

this state as soon as Ray escaped?

A. I don't know that. I have no

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1154

evidence, but that's what we heard and that

alarmed us. And we called Mr. Blanton and my

information is that he acted and the FBI was

asked to leave and Mr. Ray was recaptured and

we all breathed a sigh of relief.

Q. Yes.

MR. PEPPER: Unfortunately

nothing further. Thank you very much.

THE COURT: All right. Thank

you. You can stand down or you can remain in

the courtroom or you're free leave.

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: Let's take our break

now.

(Jury out.)

(Break taken at 3:23 p.m.)

THE COURT: Bring the jury out,

please, sir.

(Jury in at 3:53 p.m.)

THE COURT: Mr. Pepper.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you, Your

Honor. Plaintiffs call Ms. April Ferguson.

APRIL R. FERGUSON,

having been first duly sworn, was examined

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1155

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Ms. Ferguson.

A. Good afternoon.

Q. Thank you very much for joining us

this afternoon.

A. Thank you.

Q. Would you state your full name and

address for the record, please?

A. April R. Ferguson. I live in

Memphis, Tennessee.

Q. What do you do for a living?

A. I'm an attorney.

Q. And how long have you been an

attorney?

A. About 21 years.

Q. Were you an attorney in 1978?

A. I had just been admitted to the bar.

Q. Were you a part -- at that time were

you a part of the James Earl Ray defense

team?

A. I'm sorry?

Q. Were you a part of James Earl Ray's

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1156

defense team at that time?

A. Well, it was a post conviction

attempt to gain him a new trial, and I was

working with Mark Lane and Charles Galbreath

who was a retired judge in Nashville.

Q. In the course of that work, back in

1978 in the effort to seek a trial for

Mr. Ray, did there come a time when you

received a communication from an inmate who

was housed in the county jail?

A. Yes. Actually my memory of that is

necessarily unclear after all these years,

and I do have an affidavit that I had

prepared at that time that you have provided

me with if I could use that to refresh my

memory.

Q. Yes, if it's all right with the

Court.

THE COURT: You may, yes.

A. Thank you. Our office received a

call. It was directed to Mr. Lane. The

party asked for Mr. Lane, and I spoke to him

on January 30th, 1979. And he called several

times asking for Mr. Lane, and Mr. Lane was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1157

traveling. So he asked that someone from the

office come to see him so I got permission

from his attorney to visit him and did go

with our secretary to visit him in the jail

downtown here in Memphis -- that was the old

jail -- on January 31st, 1979. His name was

William Kirk, K I R K.

Q. And what did -- when you went to

visit Mr. Kirk, what did he tell you?

A. Well, we asked if we could tape

record our conversation. He would not allow

us to do that, and he also asked that we not

use his name. But of course we had his name,

and the secretary and I both took notes. Her

name was Barbara Rabbito, R A B B I T O. He

told us that he'd been in the Shelby County

Jail from 1972 until the time we interviewed

him on robbery and extortion charges, and in

August 1976, he was on furlough from the

Missouri Penitentiary for armed robbery. He

was arrested in Memphis on another charge and

unable to bond out, and he started serving

his sentence in the Shelby County Jail. And

then between October 1976 and February of '77

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1158

in the Shelby County Jail, he had met a

person named Arthur Baldwin whose name at

that time was quite well-known to Memphians.

I don't know if it is anymore.

Q. How was Mr. Baldwin's name

well-known?

A. My own personal recollection of

Mr. Baldwin is that he was the owner of

several clubs where there were girl dancers.

I don't remember if there was gambling or

anything like that. I just remember that

that was what Mr. Baldwin was known for.

Q. Okay. So he said he was contacted --

this inmate, William Kirk, said he was

contacted by Mr. Baldwin?

A. Well, he had met him, and then

Mr. Baldwin was apparently serving a sentence

for some kind of non-violent crime like

income tax evasion or he didn't know really

what it was, but he said Baldwin had already

talked to -- and I don't know how he knew

this -- to Mr. Kirk's codefendants. And

these also were names that were known to

Memphians or to me anyway -- Albert Tiller

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1159

and George Tiller. I think they were called

the terrible Tiller brothers by a lot of

people.

And apparently Mr. Baldwin had

offered them $2,500 to do a job stopping

somebody from attending a board meeting.

Then the job was offered to Mr. Kirk, and

Mr. Kirk didn't say whether he took that job

or not. But he did say he and Mr. Baldwin

were friends, that he had saved him from some

sort of unpleasantness in the jail. He also

told us that in June 1977 he was released,

but then he was arrested two weeks later for

a robbery in Germantown. He got out again

and he stayed out until November of 1977

where he was arrested in Jackson, Tennessee

and brought back to Memphis, was released

again in December.

Then he went and started visiting

Mr. Baldwin at his place of business when Mr.

Baldwin had been released, and then he said

he was offered a murder contract by

Mr. Baldwin for $5,000, and he was told that

there were three more pieces of business in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1160

Memphis for larger sums of money. And Kirk

told us that he didn't take the murder

contract and was back in jail when it was

carried out against a person named David

Macnamee (spelled phonetically) in Memphis.

And he further related that Baldwin was from

the state of Washington and that he had been

in the Memphis area since '75 or '76.

Then Kirk had to go back to Missouri

on a warrant. Then he came back to Tennessee

in March of 1978, and in September of '78, he

was sentenced to 65 years on the various

cases he was facing in Tennessee. But in

June or July of 1978, he had a telephone

conversation with Mr. Baldwin during which

time Baldwin mentioned another murder

contract for $5,000. This time with James

Earl Ray as the target, and my recollection

is that Mr. Ray was then at Brushy Mountain,

but I'm not absolutely sure.

Q. Yes, I think that's right.

A. And Kirk said to us that he didn't

know if he was being offered the contract so

much as just being told that the word needs

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1161

to get out that this contract is available.

Q. This was a contract on James Earl

Ray's life?

A. Yes.

Q. And the contract was put out by the

same Arthur Baldwin?

A. Well, it's unclear from what Mr. Kirk

told us as to who was really letting out the

contract. You know, whether it was Baldwin

or somebody else.

Q. Baldwin was communicating it in any

event?

A. Baldwin communicated it.

Q. It wasn't clear where it was coming

from?

A. Right.

Q. Right. Kirk became apprehensive

about carrying out this contract, did he?

A. He didn't. He was not in a position

at that time to take it up. I mean he was

not in that facility. He didn't indicate

that he was interested in taking it up.

Well, I think he did say later that he didn't

want to. He had heard from those who had

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1162

been at Brushy Mountain that James Earl Ray

was, quote, good people, closed quote, and

there was no need to kill him. He therefore

decided to tell Ray's attorney, and that

would have been at that time either Mr. Lane

or Mr. Galbreath.

Q. Right.

A. He -- Mr. Kirk got the impression

that Mr. Baldwin was working as an agent or

informer for the federal government. He

didn't say how he got that impression except

that it later turned out that Mr. Baldwin was

responsible somewhat for the exposure of

Governor Ray Blanton and his pay for pardon

scandal. I don't think you were here when

Governor Blanton left office early.

Q. Right.

A. So Kirk while he was out of jail

visited Baldwin frequently and was surprised

that although Baldwin had a comfortable home

here in Memphis, they frequently went to the

Executive Plaza Inn near the airport for

meetings, and it was his impression that

Mr. Baldwin was helping the federal

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1163

government in their investigation and that he

was being protected by the federal government

for being prosecuted for state violations of

the law, although he wasn't clear what those

violations were. And he was afraid -- Kirk

was afraid that this assassination plan of

Mr. Ray had originated with the federal

government, but he didn't tell us any sources

for that.

Q. Well, he did indicate and you

indicate in the affidavit that Baldwin

operated occasionally from rooms at the

Executive Plaza Inn near the airport?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you recall whether he said

that -- whether Kirk said that the phone

call -- and this was communicated by

telephone, wasn't it, this last offer?

A. Well, he just says -- yes, in June or

July of 1978. When we talked to him, I

recall that he was in a jail cell, and he had

no papers or memoranda or anything with him

so I don't know how...

Q. Just giving you this recollection?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1164

A. Yes. I don't know how accurate he

was.

Q. But in any event, he thought -- he

had the impression that this contract on

James Earl Ray's life had originated with the

federal government?

A. Well, he knew that Mr. Baldwin had

already been working for the federal

government so it's hard to say. That was

just his impression.

Q. That was his impression.

A. And I honestly can't recall -- it's

only through looking at this affidavit that I

can recall these details because I recall the

visit. I recall going there with Ms.

Rabbito, and then I recall preparing this

affidavit so we could recall what was said.

But beyond that -- I don't recall being

allowed to do any follow-up. I don't think

he wanted to speak to us anymore.

Q. You don't recall hearing anything

more about this?

A. Oh, certainly Mr. Kirk became

notorious --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1165

Q. Yes.

A. -- for other things later but..

Q. But not this?

A. We weren't able to follow-up on this

anymore.

Q. All right. Ms. Ferguson, let me just

show you this copy of the affidavit and ask

you to look at it and compare it. This is

dated the 16th day of February 1979.

(Document passed to witness.)

A. For some reason it's got two page 5's

on it that are identical, but that is what I

recollect -- that's a copy of what I have.

This is exactly the same as what I've been

looking at.

Q. Do you recognize your signature on

that?

A. Oh, I see. It's not two pages. Yes,

it's my signature.

MR. PEPPER: Move to admit, Your

Honor.

THE COURT: All right.

(Whereupon, the above-mentioned

document was marked as Exhibit 23.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1166

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Did you ever hear

anything more about this contract that

Mr. Kirk told you Mr. Baldwin had given to

him?

A. I may have, but so many years have

passed since that subject was pursued and so

many bits and pieces of information were

gathered together and then we weren't able to

pursue them that we would put a little piece

here, put it down and file it away and then

not be able to follow-up on it. I do recall

that when Mr. Kirk made a spectacular escape

from one of the Tennessee facilities that I

recalled who he was then, but I personally

can't recall what follow-up, if any, was

done.

Q. This section of plaintiffs' case is

dealing with cover up. One series of

activities of cover up happened to be

assassination, killing, a murdering of

people. That's why this is important.

A. Thank you.

Q. At that point in time you were

involved. Where is Ms. Rabbito today, do you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1167

know?

A. I wish I knew. She moved to Northern

California. I heard she was planning a

marriage, but beyond that, I don't know. I

lost track.

MR. PEPPER: Okay. Thank you

very much.

THE WITNESS: Thank you.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further.

MR. GARRISON: I have no

questions, Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right. You may

stand down.

(Witness excused.)

MR. PEPPER: Plaintiffs call

Mr. Jimmy Adams, Your Honor.

JAMES E. ADAMS,

having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Adams.

A. How are you doing?

Q. Thank you very much for joining us

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1168

here today. Would you state your name and

address for the record, please?

A. James E. Adams, 168 Shamrock in

Arkansas.

Q. Thank you. And what do you do for a

living?

A. I drive a cab.

Q. Your testimony is in a portion of the

plaintiffs' case that deals with cover

up -- various aspects of cover up. How long

have you been driving a taxi cab in Memphis?

A. Since 1966.

Q. Have you driven consistently from

that period to now?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. You've had a long history of driving

a cab?

A. (Witness nods head.)

Q. Are you familiar with the defendant

in this action, Mr. Loyd Jowers?

A. Fairly. I mean I know of him, yes.

That's about it. I knew he was in the cab

business a lot.

Q. You knew he was in the cab business

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1169

for quite a period of time?

A. Yeah.

Q. Which company do you drive for now?

A. I drive for Yellow Cab Company.

Q. For Yellow Cab. Was there a time in

the not too distant past where you drove

three people who were connected with a media

organization to the airport?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you come to know which media

organization these people were connected

with?

A. I think it was Fox Network, and I

think it was getting a lie detector test or

something is what they was talking about.

Q. They were taking a lie -- giving a

lie detector test to whom?

A. To Loyd Jowers.

Q. These media people were giving a lie

detector test to Loyd Jowers?

A. Right.

Q. Could it be that those people

represented the ABC Network?

A. It may have been. I just know they

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1170

was some kind of a TV crew, and the guy that

gave that test was supposed to be an FBI

agent. And then I found out he was not. He

was an ex-FBI agent or something is what they

told me anyway.

Q. These were people you drove -- where

did you pick them up in Memphis?

A. From the Hotel Peabody.

Q. You picked them up at the Hotel

Peabody, and they instructed you to drive to

the airport?

A. To the airport, right.

Q. And how were they seated in your cab?

A. Well, the one that actually gave the

lie detector test was sitting in the front

seat with me, and there was a lady behind him

and there was a little short man behind me.

Q. Do you remember when that was,

Mr. Adams, approximately?

A. No, not right off hand. I hadn't

really checked.

Q. And did you overhear conversation in

your cab in front of you, beside you, behind

you as you drove to the airport?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1171

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And would you tell the Court and the

jury what was the nature of that

conversation?

A. Well, the man in the front seat asked

the man in the back seat about what do you

think about this Jowers fellow, and I

didn't -- I had the window rolled down and

couldn't exactly hear what he said, but when

I heard Jowers, which I know, I rolled the

window up a little bit.

The man in the front seat said I

couldn't get the man to waver at all. He

said I actually tried to get him to tell a

lie where I could get a feel for him. He

said normally I can get a feel for people

like him. And then the man in the back seat

said, well, maybe he was on some kind of

drugs, and he said, well, yeah, but what are

you going to do, give him a urine test right

there in front of everybody, you know.

And then the lady next to him said

it was hard to believe that he could remember

all these little details over 30 years ago.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1172

And then the man next to her said, yeah,

unless he had something to do with it, and

then the man asked me -- I mean I asked him,

I said you all talking about Loyd Jowers, and

he said, yeah, do you know him? I said,

yeah, I know him. He said you think he's

capable of doing something like this, and I

said yeah. And then he said he probably done

it himself, didn't he? And I said probably.

Q. But coming back to the initial

exchange that you overheard, really against

his own interest, this examiner was saying I

couldn't get him, meaning Mr. Jowers, to

waver at all. To lie at all?

A. Well, he didn't lie. He said waver.

Q. Waver.

A. You know, that's the words that he

said. He said waver at all. He said I

couldn't get the man to waver at all. He

said I actually tried to get him to tell a

lie where I could get a feel for him. He

said normally I can get a feel for people

like this.

Q. So he tried to get Mr. Jowers to tell

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1173

a lie, but he couldn't get him to waver at

all?

A. That's what it sounds like.

Q. That's what he said to you?

A. Yes.

Q. Well, not to you, but that's what he

said in front of you?

A. Yeah, that's what he said.

Q. Did you come to know what were the

publicly made results of that lie detector

test?

A. Well, as soon as I heard this, I

told, you know, another driver that was kind

of involved in this case, James Millner, that

they gave Loyd Jowers a lie detector test.

And I said whatever he said, that he passed

the test. That's what I told him because

that's the way they talked in the cab.

Q. So you were under the impression that

Mr. Jowers passed the test, right?

A. Right.

Q. What did the media actually report

about Mr. Jowers in that test, do you recall?

A. Well, after I found out it was going

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1174

to be on TV, I watched -- I got the last part

of it where he was telling him about the

gun -- the man handed him the gun and all

that. And then the man went in the room and

he come back out and asked Mr. Jowers did he

want to know the results of his test. And he

says yeah, and he said, well, you lied about

everything.

And he said are you in this for some

kind of money deal or something like that,

and he said, no, I ain't making a dime out of

this. And I heard somebody in the background

say this interview is over with, and they

walked out.

Q. So a national television program

aired this program focusing on the lie

detector test and announced to the world that

Mr. Jowers lied.

A. Right.

Q. But in your cab --

A. It sounded like he was telling the

truth.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you,

Mr. Adams. No further questions.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1175

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Mr. Adams, you've known Mr. Jowers

some time I gather, haven't you?

A. Quite a few years. It just happened

to be that I knew he was in the cab business,

and I've seen him here and there, and I've

talked to him occasionally. But it seemed

like when he was at one cab company, I was at

the other cab company, but we have -- I've

worked at the cab company that he was working

at at one time which was Veterans Cab

Company.

Q. He never talked to you about anything

about the assassination of Dr. King, anything

he had to do with it, has he?

A. No, sir.

Q. And as far as the questions that were

asked you, they didn't really tell you what

questions they asked him, did they?

A. No.

Q. None of the people in the cab company

told you what questions they asked him, did

they?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1176

A. No, they didn't.

Q. But you saw the TV where they said

that he failed the polygraph test, a lie

detector test; is that right?

A. Yeah, I seen that on TV.

Q. That what the examiner said, that he

failed the test.

A. That's what the examiner said.

Q. Thank you.

A. That was the same guy that was in my

cab.

MR. GARRISON: Thank you, sir.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further,

Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right, sir. You

may stand down. You can remain in the

courtroom or you are permitted to leave.

(Witness excused.)

MR. PEPPER: May we approach,

Your Honor?

THE COURT: Yes.

(Dr. Pepper and Mr. Garrison

confer with the Judge at the bench without

the court reporter present.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1177

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiffs call Ms. Yolanda King to the

stand.

THE COURT: All right, sir.

YOLANDA KING,

having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Ms. King.

A. Good afternoon.

Q. Airport difficulties notwithstanding,

thank you for joining us here this afternoon.

A. Thank you.

Q. Would you state your full name and

city of residence for the record?

A. Yolanda King. I live currently in

Los Angeles.

Q. What is your current work activity or

profession?

A. I work as an actress and producer.

Q. And you are the daughter of Martin

Luther King, Junior?

A. Yes, I am.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1178

Q. Would you tell the court and jury

your reason, as you see it, for this lawsuit

being brought? Since each of the plaintiffs

have a separate interest, in addition to a

joint interest obviously, it's important that

we hear why you think this action is being

brought.

A. Well, I think even as a young

person -- younger person, I always felt that

there was more information, there was much

more to the facts than what had been reported

and what had been concluded. And while I

personally emotionally could not pursue it

myself, I thought it was very important

always that the full truth be known, that the

actual truth be known. And so it has been

actually for me personally a real sense of

peace that this is happening, the fact that

more and more of what actually happened will

be revealed to the American people.

Q. Thank you. Now, does the factor of

money or money judgment against the defendant

in this case enter into your interest in it?

A. No, not at all. There really -- that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1179

is not a consideration, was never a

consideration. It has always been for me,

for the family a question of allowing the

truth to go forth.

Q. So the family is not interested nor

has it requested any large amount of damages

from the defendant?

A. Absolutely not.

Q. Have you participated in discussions

with other members of the family about the

action, and is it your sense that this is

their feeling as well?

A. Very much, very much. We, I think,

all came to an understanding and a unity of

understanding at different times and

different points in our lives. I think

perhaps I was one of the first, but I'm the

first born so -- and older and closer. But I

think we have all come to a very unified

decision in terms of the importance of what

is happening here and also the reason why it

is so important and so significant.

Q. How old were you, Ms. King, when your

father was taken from you?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1180

A. I was twelve.

Q. And you were the eldest of the

children?

A. Exactly, uh-huh.

Q. And do you remember that loss and

that tragedy even today?

A. Oh, very much, very much. While it

took me a long time to really mourn the

loss -- for a long time I pretended that he

was just away, and because he was away a lot,

it was easy to do that. I was an adult when

I really mourned my father and really the

significance and the impact of the loss. I

allowed that to come forth, but it is -- I

guess you never get to the point where you

ever really get over it completely.

Q. Do you think this process, as taxing

as it may be for the members of the family,

is helping in that whole reconciliation?

A. Yes, and in the healing -- in the

healing. I know for myself personally I am

able to look at it in a very different way

than I was previously and to really -- really

find the sense of, as I said earlier, peace

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1181

about how things -- what happened and why.

And while needless to say we don't know all

of the facts, more and more has come to

light, and I just think it's extremely not

only personally important, but important for

the country as well.

Q. Yes. The defendant in this case of

course is Mr. Lloyd Jowers. Should he be

found libel, which is what happens in a civil

proceeding as His Honor has explained to the

jury at the outset -- should he be found

libel and culpable with being a participant

with other unknown co-conspirators, how would

you feel about Mr. Jowers? Would you have

enmity toward him? What would your feeling

be for the defendant should that verdict come

down?

A. I think a large part of the reason

because we grew up with a very strong and I

think a very honest faith and that faith and

belief has taught us and we've seen in action

the power of forgiveness and the importance

of it, I would not -- I do not feel any kind

of negative feelings towards Mr. Jowers. I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1182

think that he was part of what was

unfortunately a result of the climate that

was created and encouraged during that time.

MR. PEPPER: Ms. King, thank you

very much.

THE WITNESS: You're welcome.

MR. PEPPER: No further

questions.

MR. GARRISON: I don't have any

questions of Ms. King. Thank you.

THE COURT: Very well, ma'am.

You may step down.

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: How long did you say

your deposition is?

MR. PEPPER: It's about 40

minutes.

THE COURT: Forty minutes.

MR. PEPPER: We're prepared to

move it over, Your Honor.

THE COURT: Let's take a vote.

Well, we've already got some no's. I can

understand. It's getting rather late, and it

gets dark pretty early now. So let's stop it

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1183

here, and we'll resume tomorrow at 10:00.

(Jury out at 4:30 p.m.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1184

THE CIRCUIT COURT OF SHELBY COUNTY, TENNESSEE

THIRTIETH JUDICIAL DISTRICT AT MEMPHIS

_______________________________________________

CORETTA SCOTT KING, MARTIN

LUTHER KING, III, BERNICE KING,

DEXTER SCOTT KING and YOLANDA KING,

Plaintiffs,

Vs. Case No. 97242-4 T.D.

LOYD JOWERS and OTHER

UNKNOWN CO-CONSPIRATORS,

Defendants.

_______________________________________________

PROCEEDINGS

November 30th, 1999

VOLUME IX

_______________________________________________

Before the Honorable James E. Swearengen,

Division 4, Judge presiding.

_______________________________________________

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI,

RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

COURT REPORTERS

Suite 2200, One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

(901) 529-1999

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1185

- APPEARANCES -

For the Plaintiffs:

MR. WILLIAM PEPPER

Attorney at Law

575 Madison Avenue, Suite 1006

New York, New York 10022

(212) 605-0515

For the Defendant:

MR. LEWIS K. GARRISON, Sr.

Attorney at Law

100 North Main Street, Suite 1025

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

(901) 527-6445

Reported by:

MS. MARGIE J. ROUTHEAUX

Registered Professional Reporter

Daniel, Dillinger, Dominski,

Richberger & Weatherford

2200 One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1186

- INDEX -

WITNESS: PAGE NUMBER

JACK KERSHAW

Direct Examination

By Mr. Pepper --------------- 1188

Cross-Examination

By Mr. Garrison ------------- 1196

JACK TERREL

(By Video)

Direct Examination

By Mr. Pepper --------------- 1198

LOUIS WARD

Direct Examination

By Mr. Pepper --------------- 1234

Cross-Examination

By Mr. Garrison ------------- 1256

Redirect Examination

By Mr. Pepper --------------- 1257

RAYMOND KOHLMAN

Direct Examination

By Mr. Pepper --------------- 1258

EARL CALDWELL

(By Video)

Direct Examination

By Mr. Pepper --------------- 1265

Cross-Examination

By Mr. Ewing ---------------- 1267

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1187

- INDEX CONTINUED -

WITNESS: PAGE NUMBER

ROY GRABOW

Direct Examination

By Mr. Pepper --------------- 1271

Cross-Examination

By Mr. Garrison ------------- 1290

JOHN C. SMITH

Direct Examination

By Mr. Pepper --------------- 1292

WILLIAM SCHAAP

Direct Examination

By Mr. Pepper --------------- 1299

TRIAL EXHIBITS

24 --------------- 1265 (Collective)

25 --------------- 1271

26 --------------- 1275

27 --------------- 1286

28 --------------- 1304

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1188

P R O C E E D I N G S

(November 30th, 1999, 10:35 a.m.)

THE COURT: Are we ready for the

jury?

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, may

we approach the bench before we start?

THE COURT: Okay. Come on up.

(Whereupon a Bench Conference

was had.)

THE COURT: Bring the jury out,

please.

THE SHERIFF: Yes, sir.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: Good morning, Ladies

and Gentlemen. I see you scratching on the

door, ready to go. All right. Would you

please call your first witness, Mr. Pepper.

MR. PEPPER: Yes, Your Honor.

Your Honor, plaintiffs call Mr. Jack

Kershaw.

JACK KERSHAW,

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1189

Q. Morning, Mr. Kershaw.

A. Good morning.

Q. Thank you for joining us this

morning. I know you had some medical

problems, and it's -- it's an effort on your

part and we're grateful to you.

A. One eye's better than none.

Q. Would you please state for the record

your full name and address.

A. Jack Kershaw, K E R S H A W,

Nashville, Tennessee, member of the Nashville

Bar. The street address is 3616 Doge. The

zip is 37204.

Q. Mr. Kershaw, how long have you been a

practicing attorney?

A. Since '61.

Q. And have you practiced throughout

that period of time in the State of

Tennessee?

A. Yes.

Q. Have you lived in Nashville

throughout that period of time?

A. Yes.

Q. And did you at one time come to

represent James Earl Ray?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1190

A. Yes, I did.

Q. When did you begin to represent

Mr. Ray?

A. About the spring of '77 on the

occasion of the Congressional Committee

investigation of his case.

Q. And in the course of that

representation of Mr. Ray, did you consult

with him many times?

A. Oh, frequently.

Q. And at one point in time were you

asked -- not by Mr. Ray but by someone

else -- to have a meeting with an author,

William Bradford Huie?

A. That would have been in the summer of

'77, my best recollection. I received a

call from some official at Thomas Nelson

Publishing Company that William Bradford

Huie, a writer for Look Magazine, would like

to meet with me about an unrevealed

question. And I told him I'd be glad to.

And I appeared at the conference room at the

publishing company in due course and met with

Mr. Huie.

Q. And at that time that you met with

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1191

Author Huie, you were representing James Earl

Ray?

A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. And he was aware of that?

A. Oh, yes.

Q. Now, flashing back a bit, had Author

Huie published articles on this case prior to

your meeting with him?

A. Yes. Not too long after the event,

Mr. Huie published two or three stories for

Look Magazine in which he promised to reveal

the true assassin of Martin Luther King. His

fourth article did a turn about. Instead of

revealing a conspiracy and the identity of a

mysterious assassin, he laid it all on James

Earl Ray.

Q. Which he had not done in his -- in

his previous articles?

A. It was an absolute change of face.

It was a flip-flop.

Q. Now, did you go to the Nelson

Publishing Company in Nashville and meet with

Mr. Huie?

A. Yes.

Q. And where did you meet with him in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1192

that publishing company?

A. In the conference room of the

publishing company.

Q. And who was present at that meeting?

A. I, of course, and Mr. Huie, and

Mr. Huie was accompanied by a couple of young

men who I did not recognize and a couple

other young men who were obviously junior

vice president or something or other of the

Thomas Nelson Publishing Company.

Q. But the people who you did not

recognize with Mr. Huie at that meeting, did

they identify themselves to you?

A. No.

Q. They didn't?

A. No.

Q. Is that unusual to participate in a

meeting and others there do not identify

themselves to you?

A. Well, the whole thing was unusual

without any proper procedure.

Q. And what took place at that meeting?

What was the purpose of Mr. Huie requesting

you to meet with him?

A. He offered a sum of money for James

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1193

Earl Ray's story, quote, unquote. And I

asked him, what story did he want? That

Mr. Ray was telling his story every week

before the Congressional Committee. And

Mr. Huie informed me that the story he

referred to was how he killed by himself --

he and he alone killed -- shot and killed

Martin Luther King.

Q. So this writer, William Bradford

Huie, wanted a story -- the story from James

Earl Ray of how he, acting alone, killed

Martin Luther King?

A. That's right.

Q. And he was prepared to pay a sum of

money for that story?

A. Yes. He offered $25,000 for that

story. And I immediately asked him, what

good is the money going to do this man? He's

in the penitentiary. And Mr. Huie said,

well, we'll get him on pardon immediately.

Q. So Mr. Ray would tell the story,

admit his guilt, he would be given a sum of

money and he would be given a pardon?

A. That was Mr. Huie's message to me.

Q. How did Mr. Huie -- did he indicate

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1194

at all how he was going to arrange this

pardon?

A. Well, I asked him a little bit about

that, and he never revealed his source of

influence with the governor.

Q. But he seemed confident he could

arrange a pardon?

A. Oh, yes, he was very confident. I

suggested that he arrange the pardon before

the story, but he didn't agree to that.

Q. That didn't go over very well. Of

course, Mr. Ray was on detainer from the

State of Missouri at the time. Did he say he

could arrange a pardon from the State of

Missouri as well?

A. That subject didn't come up. One

pardon presumably would be enough.

Q. I see. And this was all at the time

when the Congressional Committee was

investigating the case?

A. Yes.

Q. Well, Mr. Kershaw, did you, as James

Earl Ray's attorney, take this offer to

Mr. Ray in prison?

A. Yes. When the meeting came to a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1195

close, I rose and addressed Mr. Huie and I

told him that I would be glad to take his

offer to Mr. Ray, but that it seemed to me

that his very presence here in this

conference room contradicted his mission.

That his presence here indicated to me that

there was probably a rich and powerful man

behind the scenes who had instructed a rich

and powerful and gifted writer to make

overtures to get a certain story. And that

in brief, his proposition for a lone madman

killer clearly indicated a conspiracy.

Q. What did Mr. Huie reply to that?

A. He turned as red as a proverbial beet

and managed to say nothing. He was a

sandy-haired, red-faced little man to begin

with. And he never answered.

Q. And you then left. Did you

eventually take this offer to Mr. Ray?

A. Yes, I did. I was very interested to

see what his reaction would be.

Q. And what was Mr. Ray's reaction?

A. He didn't want any part of it.

Q. So he turned it down?

A. That's right.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1196

Q. He turned it down flat. Did you ever

hear anything more about this offer or --

A. I never heard further from Mr. Huie.

MR. PEPPER: That's fine,

Mr. Kershaw. Thank you very much.

THE WITNESS: All right.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Mr. Kershaw, let me ask you a

question. It appears you and I started

practicing law the same year, 1961. Isn't it

true that Mr. Huie later said that he had

investigated this and talked to a number of

witnesses and he had come to the conclusion

that Mr. Ray acted alone in this

assassination? Isn't that what he later

said?

A. I'm sorry. Could you repeat that.

Q. Yes, sir. Isn't it true that

Mr. Huie later said that he had talked to a

number of witnesses, including Mr. Ray, and

he concluded that Mr. Ray acted alone? Isn't

that what he later said publicly?

A. I don't recall any such statement

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1197

from Mr. Huie.

Q. Did you ever have any further meeting

with him after this time?

A. No.

MR. GARRISON: That's all.

Thank you.

THE COURT: All right, sir. You

may stand down now.

THE WITNESS: Thank you.

(Witness excused.)

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiffs have been holding off on the

testimony of a couple of witnesses hoping

that they could be brought here and be

available to the Court. And it appears that

in the lateness of the hour, in terms of

plaintiffs' case, that that's not going to be

possible for one reason or another, which I'm

glad to explain to the Court.

So we'll have to proceed with the

video deposition of the first one. This

first witness is dying of liver cancer, and

he has at various times been up and about.

He's hemorrhaged rather badly in the last

week and is bed ridden. He desperately did

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1198

want to come here. But anticipating this

problem, he was deposed in Orlando, Florida,

some time ago.

So with the Court's permission, we

would like to play that -- that first video

deposition.

THE COURT: All right. You

may.

MR. PEPPER: The name of the

witness, Your Honor, is Mr. Jack Terrel,

T E R R E L.

(Whereupon the afore-mentioned

video deposition was played for the Court and

Jury.)

(Transcript from video tape

testimony follows.)

UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: Will the

court reporter please swear in the witness.

JACK TERREL,

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Could you state your full name and --

and address for the record, please, Jack.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1199

A. My name is Jack R. Terrel. I live at

Q. Jack, will you tell us when you were

born and where you were born.

A. I was born April 13, 1941, in

Birmingham, Alabama.

Q. And you -- could you describe for us

now the current state of your health.

A. At the present time I'm suffering

from terminal liver disease as a result of

Hepatitis C contract -- contracted in Burma

about ten years ago.

Q. And how far progressed is the disease

and what is -- what is the prognosis for you?

A. Without a liver, I will not see

Christmas.

Q. You will not see this Christmas --

A. No.

Q. -- 1999?

A. 1999, no.

Q. Let me thank you for coming here

under these circumstances and making --

A. No problem.

Q. -- yourself available, Jack. I'm

very grateful to you. If we could go a bit

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1200

into your background. Was there a time when

you joined an organization called the

Civilian Military Assistance?

A. Yes, there was. I joined the CMA in

1984.

Q. And what was the nature of that

organization? What was their involvement?

A. At the time they were supplying

everything from arms and ammunition to

military software to the Contra Rebels in

Honduras.

Q. And is that a part of the operation

to try to overthrow the -- the government of

Nicaragua?

A. Correct. They were working hand in

hand with the FDN, which at that time was

headed by Adolpho Calero.

Q. Who was the authority behind that

organization and who created it?

A. The Central Intelligence Agency. It

was created by -- it has a history that goes

back to the early 80's when the Sandanistas,

which were at that time backed by the United

States Government, were launching attacks

from Costa Rica and Nicaragua to overthrow

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1201

the Somoza government, Daniel Ortega and his

troops under the Sandanista banner.

And once he declared communism as

their form of government, the CIA assigned

the regional chief of operations, Duane

Claridge, which people also know as Duey

Claridge or Duey Maroni, which was his nom

deguerre, to go to Nicaragua and commence

militarily bringing down the government. And

he was given 250 million dollars to do it

with.

Q. What was the status of these

operations with respect to the law of the

United States at that time?

A. In the beginning it was unknown to

most U.S. Government officials outside of few

people in the Senate Oversight Committee,

until William Casey approved the mining of

the harbors in Managua which were

subsequently hit by three Soviet vessels.

And the hot line lit up in the White House,

and Ronald Reagan was sort of caught off

guard. And he went down the chain, what's

happening?

And it leaked to the Congressional

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1202

Oversight Committee, and they went

ballistic. And a Congressman by the name of

Bolen floored a bill to create what is now

known as the Bolen Amendment. It was tacked

onto another bill which in essence said that

no aid, whether it be bandaids, bullets,

anything, was to go from the United States --

either militarily or civilian or charitable

or anything else -- to aid the Contra Rebels

in this supposedly overthrow.

Q. At the time -- so at the time you

were involved, the Bolen Amendment was in

effect?

A. Correct.

Q. And were the operations that you

observed in violation -- from what you could

see in violation of that amendment?

A. Directly in violation because we were

shipping arms and ammunition to the Contras.

Q. Right. In a book that you've --

you've written, Jack, about -- that recounts

some of these events -- a book called

Disposable Patriot --

A. Right.

Q. -- you referred to a pool of talent

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1203

that is drawn upon for these types of

plausibly deniable operations.

A. Mm-hum.

Q. Would you just elaborate on what

that -- what that phrase means. What is the

pool of talent you're referring to?

A. Well, you have to go back in the

Central Intelligence Agency -- all the way

back to Stansfield Turner. When Jimmy Carter

appointed Stansfield Turner the head of the

CIA, he immediately cut loose over 1,500

field agents and black operatives in various

countries, this country, working within the

military or whatever.

When Casey took the helm of the CIA,

he not only brought back these people in

black operations, he also enlisted through

Fort Bragg special operations called JSOA.

It was called Joint Special Operations Agency

which had a door in the Pentagon, but behind

that door was an empty office.

At Fort Bragg it was called JSOC,

Joint Operations Command, which was supposed

to be members of the Marines, Army and Air

Force working together in black operations.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1204

But in realty it was reserve units that were

not only in place but some that were created

to carry out certain operations.

But some of the older reserves went

back into the 70's and into the 60's post

Vietnam that were operating in various parts

of the country. And, actually, nobody knew

they existed because they trained in rural

remote states. But when they would carry out

operations, it would be in civilian clothing.

Q. Was one of those reserves units,

perhaps the largest, the 20th Special Forces

Group?

A. The 20th Special Forces Group,

correct. It operated in a five-prong

situation throughout the south in Louisiana,

Alabama, Tennessee, Mississippi, Arkansas.

Q. Right. And so it was from the 20th

Special Forces Group as well as the other

sources that these -- that these -- this

talent was drawn --

A. Correct.

Q. -- for these kinds of operations.

A. They either used the reserves whom

they could command, or they had an ancillary

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1205

that through the reserves they could bring in

civilian black operatives to work with

reserves -- with the -- the 20th Special

Forces and the Night Stalkers at Fort

Campbell, things of -- people in groups of

this nature. So it was -- it was very fluid

and involved thousands of people.

Q. Okay. Now, what was your role in the

CI -- CMA operations in Latin America?

A. I was actually placed into the CMA by

Donald Fortier, who was with the National

Security Council, as the eyes and ears for

the National Security Council within a

civilian organization to see that the

mandates that were being passed through from

CIA to NSC be carried out in Central America.

Q. And when -- when you were placed into

the CMA operations, what was -- what was your

role? What were you -- what were you

expected to do?

A. Well, I was working as a contractor

for the Central Intelligence Agency. And I

was to not only be the eyes and ears but also

eventually head the organization and -- and

to carry out the orders that we have received

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1206

from -- anything from assassinations to

ground infiltrations to sabotage.

In fact, we had an operation

called -- our primary responsibility --

Pegasus, which in Spanish is Pagasso, which

we had targeted on a feeding-style project

from Vietnam to go in and take out the

infrastructure physically and personnel wise,

meaning in the directorate of the Sandanistas

assassinate these people to overthrow the

government.

Q. Now, if you were placed in this

organization by a member -- a high-ranking

member of the National Security Council --

A. Mm-hum.

Q. -- is it conceivable -- and the

National Security Council reported directly

to the president of the United States.

A. Yes, sir, they did, every day.

Q. Is it conceivable that the president

of the United States -- would be the vice

president of the United States at the time --

did not know that these activities were going

on in contravention of the Bolen Amendment?

A. The president directly knew. George

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1207

Bush went past knowing. He was over his

head, actually using his assistant to -- and

also his son who is now the governor of

Florida, Jeb Bush, in seeing that quote,

unquote, civilian operations went forward in

the means of transporting aircraft for supply

drops to loading ships with weapons in the

port of Miami, Florida, destined for the

area, putting Manuel Noriega on the payroll

which in turn allowed the bidding cartel from

Columbia to franchise Central America.

And this is where the rub came with

me is because they went into -- the CIA

caused creative financing, which they did in

Vietnam under General Frank Powell and Air

America, which was the transportation of what

they call sticky bricks or opium and the

money deposited in the New Guinean bank in

Australia. They were trying to create the

same situation in concert with a bank called

the BCCI which is now history.

But it was a well-orchestrated

thing, and such a situation that I would put

it this way. If you were a fly on the wall

in the Oval Office, they would have -- they

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1208

would have impeached him faster than even

considering an impeachment on Clinton because

they -- they were up to their elbows in it.

Q. Now, you became disenchanted at one

point in time.

A. Oh, yes.

Q. What was the reason for your

disenchantment?

A. Drugs. The allowing shipments of

drugs to be flown in American aircraft to

Homestead, Florida; U.S. Air Force planes,

contracting people to fly from Cartagena,

Barranquilla, Medellin, to Corn Island and

Nicaragua or to northern Costa Rica to quote,

unquote, a CIA base to be refueled to be

brought into the United States. Therefore, a

kilo of cocaine went from $80,000 to $18,000

in a matter of 30 days.

So I came to Washington to testify

before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee

and aired my gripes about it because I was at

that time supposed to be running the

organization. And I found out you do not go

against a popular sitting president the hard

way.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1209

Q. So you became -- effectively became a

whistle blower?

A. Oh, yes.

Q. And it was triggered by the fact that

you objected to the elicit smuggling of drugs

into the United States as a means of

financing these covert operations?

A. Correct.

Q. And what happened -- what happened to

you as a result of your attempting to -- to

testify?

A. Two attempts were made on my life.

One in San Jose, Costa Rica, where there's

probably still a Toyota sitting there with 92

bullet holes in it. And I was poisoned in

Manapol Grama (phonetic) by agents working

through an organization headed by General

Richard Secor and Oliver North, who was

reporting to Bill Casey, called Operation

Freedom.

But it was all a store-front

operation to shut me up because I have got

clout -- I am in possession of classified

information stating that I knew quote,

unquote, too much about their operation, so

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1210

they needed to terminate me. When that

didn't work, they went after my credibility.

They tapped my telephones. Even

down to telling my daughter that I was a paid

intelligence asset for Fidel Castro. I was

listed as a terrorist threat to the United

States Government. I was taken by the Secret

Service to -- from offices in Washington to

be polygraphed, which I passed.

And during -- the 15 questions that

I was asked by the Secret Service, only one

of them had to do with assassination. And

that question was: Do you now or have you

ever thought of harming anyone who worked for

the United States Government? The rest of

them was did I agree with Ronald Reagan's

policy on Central America -- political

questions.

But I passed it. And they really

couldn't do anything to me at that point

except continue to go after my credibility.

Q. Did they at one point in time, also

in attempting to destroy your credibility,

seek to prosecute you?

A. Oh, yes. I was indicted on six

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1211

counts in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, by Edwin

Meese, at the direction of the White House,

who forced the acting U.S. Attorney at the

time in a distant state -- you know, I'm in

Washington D.C., but they indicted me in Fort

Lauderdale and basically for following

orders. But the -- one of the indictments,

to show you how far they will reach, was

conspiring to put a luggage tag on a suitcase

containing a firearm that they issued.

You know, so it was that bad. So

our attorneys -- my attorney, John Magids,

filed a precedent setting motion under -- I

can't even think of the name of the law at

the time -- a neutral anti-trial act called

the "At Peace Motion" which said that we were

not at war with Nicaragua but we weren't at

peace with them either.

So George -- Judge Norman Rutger,

who is the second highest seniority to John

Serika (phonetic), said this is the most

politically charged indictment I have ever

seen in my life and threw it out.

Q. So he dismissed the indictment?

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1212

Q. And the prosecution did not go ahead?

A. Well, the CIA came down there and

briefed the judge. And at that point the

prosecution actually wound up becoming

witnesses in our case.

Q. Was there any polygraph that you had

to take -- that you did take -- that you

elected to take during that point in time

that you failed with respect to any of these

events?

A. No, I've never failed a polygraph.

Q. Jack, we can go back now to an

earlier time around about -- or in the early

1970's you moved to Mississippi.

A. Correct, Columbus.

Q. And you established a business

there.

A. Correct.

Q. Could you just describe the business

that you developed.

A. I developed an EMS system while I was

in Montgomery, Alabama, that was designed to

work in rural states. And Mississippi was

the most rural. I was told it couldn't work,

so I took the challenge and went ahead with

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1213

it and became extraordinarily successful with

it. And in the process I hired and had at

one point probably 400 people working for

me. And everything was roses.

Q. Was one of the people working for you

whom you met and became friendly with a -- a

reserve officer in the 20th Special Forces

Group?

A. There were several. But the one

you're talking about came to work for me --

J.D. Hill, who is a member of the 20th

Special Forces which, incidentally, had a

training headquarters in Columbus.

Q. Mm-hum.

A. But he came to work for me and

eventually rose to the rank of supervisor

within my organization stationed at the home

office in Columbus. And during this period,

because of shared interest in firearms and

things of this nature, we became very close

friends.

Q. Right. Could you describe J.D. Hill

as a -- how you came to -- what your

impression of him was during the time that he

worked for you.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1214

A. J.D. was a -- he was a strange person

in a lot of ways, but in some ways he was a

very intelligent, well-trained individual who

had -- before he come to work with me fought

in Costa Rica. His mother had come from

Costa Rica. But he knew exactly what he

wanted in life in many ways. His only

setback was that he drank.

But when I promoted him to the rank

of supervisor, it was on the condition that

he stop drinking, which he did. He

completely quit drinking and became another

man. He confided in me often about things he

wouldn't talk with (sic) because he came from

a broken home. He was full of rage. He was

the type of person -- if I was going to pick

for an operation, he would be the type I

would pick. He profiled perfectly on a -- on

a lot of things for people that you would

want to look death in the face and not worry

about it.

Q. Did you learn much about the unit he

was attached to, the 20th Special Forces

Group, during this time?

A. I went past that. I tried to get

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1215

into it, and they wouldn't let me. I used to

go out on the weekends and parachute jump

with them, and I got to know many of them

there.

Q. Right.

A. You know, and they would tell me

stories that at that time seemed kind of

unbelievable. But as time passed by, they

weren't so unbelievable.

Q. Did that unit have a training session

once a year?

A. Once a year at Camp Shelby,

Mississippi, they would go for two weeks and

just disappear off the face of the earth, and

then they would show back up two weeks later.

Q. Right. And was that -- were members

of that unit used on various covert

operations throughout this period?

A. Many. A lot of them -- I didn't know

about some of them. I did know about

mission -- two missions that were told to me,

one called Operation Back Pack and one of

them called Operation Quail Hunter. One of

them was designed to literally take a nuclear

device behind enemy lines in a back pack and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1216

plant it at an undisclosed location to be

detonated later. But that's how high --

highly they were thought of where they could

carry nuclear weapons.

Q. Were they -- were they -- did they

wear civilian clothing in the course of these

covert operations?

A. They never were in uniform -- always

in civilian clothes. And I was told on many

occasions, you know, that if you see me

somewhere and I'm supposed to be, you know,

doing something for the military and I don't

have a uniform on, act like you don't know

me.

Q. Was there a time when your

relationship developed closely enough with --

with J.D. Hill that he had told you about a

highly secret operation that he had been

involved in some years before?

A. Mm-hum. He had just returned from

Camp Shelby, Mississippi, on one of these

tours they did down there, and he looked like

a completely different person. He had lost

like 45 pounds, he was hard as a rock, his

eyes were like steel. And I told him -- I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1217

said, you know, people who are on diets need

to go where you went because I've never seen

anybody make a transformation like this. And

he said, well, it wasn't the first time.

And I said, what are you talking

about? And he said, well, you do what you

got to do. And I said, well, that's still

not telling me anything. And he said, well,

I'll tell you about it one day. And one day

we were out in the field in one of our cars

and went to an old beer joint -- I don't even

drink, but went to a beer joint down near the

state line. And he said, I want to tell you

something I think I need to get off my

chest.

And he said, not that it's worrying

me or bugging me or anything else but, he

says, I'm going to show you the level of what

it amounted to -- the involvement that they

had. And he started telling me about a

covert operation that he was involved in that

he really didn't know what he was doing. He

was asked to come to Shelby for special

training. He was a sniper. In fact, he had

three MOS's. And he said that he was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1218

assigned to a --

Q. Excuse me, Jack. Would you explain

what an MOS is.

A. Well, it's a military occupation

specialty. He said that he was assigned to a

team of men at Camp Shelby that had been put

together as a chute -- triangular chute team,

which means chuting from three positions.

And that they went into training and would be

sent to Pocatello, Idaho, to start shooting

at moving targets because they had been told

that they were going to take out an Arab

leader -- unnamed and unknown Arab leader.

And they had to refine their

shooting skills to such a point -- different

elevations, different angles, but always from

the triangular chute on moving vehicles. And

they practiced, practiced, practiced. And he

said they -- they were told what they needed

to know. Everything was on a need-to-know

basis. He said later that he was called back

to Shelby and the team was there. They were

not issued their standard sniper weapons,

which at that time they were using SSG's

which is made by Manliquor (phonetic). It's

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1219

a double-trigger weapon that fires a 3.75 by

five, nine, I think, slug. But it's pretty

powerful and deadly accurate at 1,100

meters.

And they worked out with

standard-issue 30 aught 6 weapons which he

thought was very weird. He said, man -- he

said, they just gave us 30 aught 6's to go

out and start shooting these things. He

said, we didn't know what -- what was going

on. And he said, I was about ready to ruck

up -- which means pack up -- and leave. And

he says he was told real quick by the

commander of the base, you know, that they

were confined and they were fixing to go

somewhere. And he said, you will be briefed

at the time.

He said that they had been taken via

aircraft to West Memphis, Arkansas, and put

on stand by, and that they were to take out a

target in Memphis, Tennessee, still unknown

at the time. And the chute map was laid out

to them and they had two scenarios. One was

a moving scenario, the other was a scenario

involving a hotel where they would fire on

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1220

the target from three positions -- one from

the water tower, one from the third floor of

a building, and the third place was the

rooftop of another building.

And they would be given the yes or

no within a certain period of time. And he

said while on standby they were picked up,

and they were going to go into Memphis. And

all of a sudden it was cancelled. And they

started just rushing people out, and they put

him on a plane and literally flew him back

directly to a county north of Browns County,

Mississippi, and told to, you know, go back

to town, nothing happened, you know. You've

been out of town on a training exercise,

nobody knows nothing. Keep your mouth shut.

Q. So this unit was trained to shoot at

a target or targets in a moving vehicle, that

was the --

A. Originally, yes.

Q. Originally that's what they were --

that they were geared up to do, and that's

what their training at Pocatello was --

A. Mm-hum.

Q. -- was to do. And then -- and they

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1221

were put on standby in West Memphis,

Arkansas.

A. Correct.

Q. And then the operation, for some

reason, was cancelled and they were taken --

they were taken out of there.

A. Mm-hum.

Q. Did they take up their positions at

any point in Memphis?

A. They were headed in to take up their

positions when the mission was cancelled.

Q. They were heading in --

A. Yes.

Q. -- to take up the positions --

A. Yes.

Q. -- when it was cancelled?

A. But it was no way for him to know

what -- in the make-up of the organization

you had three snipers, a command and control

officer, communications officers, had an

ordnance officer and a medic. So they didn't

travel like a covey of quail. You know, they

would be taken differently. Whether other

people had been taken in and set up, he had

no knowledge of it because he was taken out

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1222

by himself. You know, he was flown

singularly.

Q. Oh, he was taken out by himself?

A. Yes, singularly, and flown into the

county above.

Q. I see. So he doesn't know what --

A. No.

Q. -- what happened. Did he ever say

that he had discussed this with any of the

other members of the team at any point?

A. Oh, they all discussed it the next

day.

Q. All right.

A. Because he said, I picked up the

paper and said, oh, my God.

Q. What did he -- what did he read in

the paper that made him say "oh, my God"?

A. That Martin Luther King had been

assassinated.

Q. Martin Luther King had been

assassinated in Memphis, Tennessee --

A. Memphis, Tennessee.

Q. -- on the 4th of April, 1968?

A. Mm-hum.

Q. And then was it his view that he

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1223

had -- he was somehow -- or his unit was

somehow -- had been trained or were being

trained and being prepared to -- to carry out

that assassination?

A. At that time he knew exactly that was

the purpose. He don't know why they were

scrubbed, but he knows exactly that they were

trained for that mission and were never told.

Q. Presumably the reconnaissance was

done by vice -- by others in advance of that

operation?

A. They believe the FBI, among others,

was doing recon and military intelligence.

Q. What eventually happened to J.D.

Hill?

A. J.D., like I said, was a strange

fellow. And he was a person of habit. He

was paranoid to the point that he kept a

light on in front of his house at all times.

And I was called about 2 o'clock in the

morning and advised by another supervisor

that J.D. had been found shot dead on his

porch and said that his wife had shot him

because he was drunk.

So I asked him -- I said, were you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1224

there? And he said, yes. I said, well, tell

me what's going on. And I said, is the light

on? And he said -- he said, no. What

light? And it just sort of struck a chord in

my head. Why is the light out, you know.

And I knew the investigating officers and

went down to see the set up but really never

got to see the set up. And I didn't go to

his funeral, you know, because I was

extraordinarily upset about it because his

wife was almost red carpeted out of town

after he was shot.

But I do know that he was shot at

close range with a .357 Magnum in almost a

circular pattern around his heart. He was

dead so fast his eyes were still open when he

hit the ground. And I thought to myself,

Janice Hill only weighed like 90 -- 89 pounds

rather, and had no experience with firearms.

And if it was indeed dark -- number one, J.D.

wouldn't have approached the porch. Number

two, if someone of her stature and the

knowledge of firearms had shot him, it

would -- it wouldn't even have come close to

being a pattern of putting three -- I mean,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1225

five .357's in a circular pattern because the

first shot would have disoriented her so bad,

she wouldn't know where she was in the dark.

So none of it added up, you know.

And I asked questions, questions, questions

trying to see at one point Janice Hill and

wasn't allowed to see her. You know, but in

my mind to this day my belief was he was --

he was assassinated.

Q. She was -- she was charged and a

Grand Jury was convened but nothing --

A. Correct.

Q. -- was ever raised against her. So

there was no indictment.

A. Mm-hum.

Q. And she then left Columbus.

A. But to this day I imagine you would

find very little evidence about the

shooting.

Q. Now, coming back to the unit -- and

this was a -- this sniper team was a 20th

Special Forces --

A. Group.

Q. -- Unit.

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1226

Q. I have checked the rosters of -- of

that unit from each of the -- each of the

states that -- that you have mentioned. I'm

not going to ask you to identify any names or

state any names for the record. But I'm just

going to show you the Mississippi roster, and

I'm just going to see if any of the names on

that roster are names that you heard about or

knew were involved on this team -- this

assassination team with -- with J.D. Hill.

A. See, it's easy to do because J.D. had

told me anybody on the team had to hold at

least the rank of sergeant. And --

Q. Do you see any names there that --

that --

A. One --

Q. -- you know?

A. -- two, three -- and all three of

these people were very close. One, two --

Q. There's J.D.'s name.

A. Mm-hum, J.D. And this one, this

one.

Q. Then you go down to Florida. So

it's -- so there are recognizable names there

on that roster of people who were on that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1227

team.

A. Mm-hum.

Q. Well, Jack, at various times in your

professional career, you have been -- you've

been interviewed by television teams, and

you've been a source of information --

A. More than I can count.

Q. -- via television on documentary and

news programs, haven't you?

A. Mm-hum. Mm-hum.

Q. Have you as well been a source of

information to -- to ABC's news department

for various --

A. Several times.

Q. -- things?

A. Several times. In fact, I worked

very closely with a producer there, Chris

Isham, on a couple of big stories which were

aired.

Q. And did ABC ever require you to take

a polygraph?

A. Yes, they did. They took me to

Miami, Florida, and had me polygraphed to

make -- to make sure of my quote, unquote,

reliability because of this whole situation

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1228

about the credibility thing in Washington.

But I've been on 60 Minutes, Larry King, you

name it. None of them asked me to do it, you

know. But, like I said, Mike Wallace

would -- if I called him today and said I got

a story, he would say come to New York, you

know, because I've done it before. Because

they have no doubt about my credibility. But

ABC wanted to make sure.

Q. Right. And when you took the ABC

polygraph test, what were the results?

A. I passed it.

Q. And so your credibility was, in your

mind anyway, well established with ABC.

A. Oh, yes.

Q. Now, do you recall some while ago

that ABC did a program -- a documentary on

the King assassination?

A. Mm-hum.

Q. A program presented by a chap called

Forest Sawyer.

A. Yes.

Q. Now, did they send a team here to

Florida to interview you?

A. Right up the road here in a hotel.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1229

Q. And how long did that interview take?

A. About three hours.

Q. So they interviewed you for three

hours?

A. Mm-hum.

Q. And did you tell them -- that ABC

team -- did you tell them the story that you

have put forward here today under oath?

A. Yes, I have.

Q. And this -- with this kind of

detail --

A. Correct.

Q. -- about the presence of that 20th

Special Forces Unit --

A. Correct.

Q. -- in Memphis? And was any of that

interview -- any part of that interview used

on that documentary?

A. No. I was shocked when it wasn't.

Q. Not -- not one second of that

interview --

A. Not one second, no.

Q. -- was used. And do you have any

idea why it wasn't used?

A. Well, after the interview, a few days

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1230

later, I received a phone call from an old

friend of mine in FBI counter intelligence.

And he said, I thought your press days were

over. And I said, well, what are you talking

about? He says, M.I. knows everything that

you're doing with ABC, and that's military

intelligence. So, evidently, DIA was and may

still be keeping an eye on me. And they

didn't -- who knows. If they didn't want it

used, it wouldn't have been used.

Q. So this clearly implies that there

was some -- appears to have been some

collaboration between ABC and

intelligence. Or at least to the extent that

your --

A. Their knowledge --

Q. Their knowledge.

A. -- was out, yes. They had called it

a leak, you know. But somebody knew, yes.

Because, again, this guy didn't just call me

out of the blue. They sent me a message.

And I soon after left the country.

Q. You left the country after that?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. You felt that that was the prudent

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1231

thing to do in terms of --

A. Well, I'm tired of being a target,

you know. I mean, they tried too many times

to get me. And I've learned over the years

that if you want to disappear, you leave the

country for an extended period and you come

back and set up in a different place and they

got a cold trail.

Q. How long were you gone when you left

the country?

A. Several months. In fact, I went to

Russia just to piss them off.

Q. But coming back to the absence of

your -- your information and your

recollection on the ABC program, there would

have been no basis for them to --

A. None.

Q. -- challenge your credibility because

they had used you --

A. Oh, yes.

Q. -- so many times before and tested

it.

A. Correct.

Q. And they knew you very well.

A. Correct. Several people at ABC,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1232

Karen Burns, people like this, they all know

me. They know my credibility. They've done

too many stories on me. I was the source for

too many of their stories while I was in

Washington for nearly two years.

Q. So there has to be another reason --

A. Yes.

Q. -- for their failure to use that

story. Jack, we just -- we're coming to the

end here, and we have moved along quite

well. I'd just like to know that in the 20

odd years or so that's intervened since J.D.

Hill told you about him being trained and

being a part of the unit that was under

orders to kill Martin Luther King, Jr., if

you -- if you have developed any reason to

question what J.D. was telling you -- any --

anything at all that -- that would lead you

now to disbelieve what he was saying to you

then --

A. No. None. Nothing whatsoever. I

mean, then, now, whatever -- in fact, I

probably would believe it more now than I did

then, you know. Because just the time line

and the way things -- you know, you can look

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1233

back and see things. But probably time has

reinforced what he told me more than, you

know, him just telling me then, which I

believed then because we were that close.

Q. So do you now with all of -- all of

this consideration and all of your conscience

believe that your old friend J.D. Hill was a

part of a 20th Special Forces Sniper Unit

that was on a mission to kill Martin Luther

King on the 4th of April, 1968?

A. Well, if this was a death bed

confession, I wouldn't change a word. Yes,

of course I believe it.

Q. Okay. No doubt at all?

A. No doubt.

Q. Okay. Thanks very much.

A. Sure.

UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: The time

is 3:45 p.m. We're off the record.

(End of video deposition.)

THE COURT: Okay. Let's take a

short break.

(Brief break taken.)

THE COURT: Bring the jury out,

please, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1234

THE SHERIFF: Yes.

(Jury In.)

THE COURT: Ready, Mr. Pepper?

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiffs call Mr. Louis Ward to the stand.

LOUIS WARD,

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Ward.

A. Good afternoon.

Q. Thank you for coming here today and

helping us in this case.

A. You're welcome.

Q. Would you please state your full name

and address for the record.

A. Louie Ward, 2440 Cardigan Drive,

Memphis, Tennessee. That's 38119.

Q. And what do you do presently,

Mr. Ward?

A. Roofer presently.

Q. I know you -- are you involved in

roofing activity part time or full time?

A. Well, part time now. I have full

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1235

time for about 36 years, but I'm just part

time now. My boy now is kind of handling

most of it.

Q. What did you do previously in

addition to being a roofer?

A. Well, I was security police for the

Government for about 22 years. Of course, I

done -- drove a taxicab part time.

Q. Where did you work in security police

work?

A. Out at the Army Depot.

Q. I'm sorry?

A. At the Army Depot.

Q. The Army Depot. And where was that?

A. Out on Airways Boulevard.

Q. I see.

A. 2163 Airways.

Q. So you held that position for how

long?

A. 22 years in the security police, and

then the last eight years I was a roofer out

there.

Q. And in addition to that you said

you -- you also drove a taxicab part time.

A. Yes, I sure did.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1236

Q. And for which company did you drive a

taxicab?

A. Well, I drove for both companies. Of

course, I drove for Yellow most of the time.

Of course, there was about -- when I first

came to Memphis, I came to take a course in

watch making. And I started driving a cab in

order to have some money coming in. I done

that for three years, and then I found other

jobs, and I just drove part time then for

several years.

Q. Right. And in 1968 which company

were you driving for?

A. Yellow.

Q. You were driving for Yellow?

A. Mm-hum.

Q. Mr. Ward, could you come forward a

bit, a little closer to the microphone so

everyone can hear.

A. Is that better?

Q. Yes. Can you pull your chair

forward, please, just a little bit.

THE COURT: That's good.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Okay. I think that

will be better. Thank you. You were driving

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1237

for Yellow Cab in 1968?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. All right. How often did you drive

for them?

A. Oh, most of the time about once a

week or sometimes twice a week. On my off

days out at the depot I would usually drive.

Q. Okay. Were you driving for Yellow

Cab Company on the 4th of April, 1968?

A. Yes, I sure was.

Q. And were you driving for Yellow on

the evening of April 4, 1968?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you -- in the course of your

taxicab driving and duties, did you come to

know a driver named Paul Butler?

A. I sure did.

Q. And do you remember which car number

Mr. Butler was driving on the 4th of April,

1968?

A. 58.

Q. He was driving Car Number 58?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Do you know how long Mr. Butler had

driven for Yellow?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1238

A. Several years because the drivers

that had drove a long time drove the new

cabs, and us drivers that just drove part

time drove the old cabs. So he had a new cab

that he -- at that time that he drove. So he

had been there for some bit.

Q. So -- so Mr. Butler had been driving

for Yellow Cab for a number of years.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did he always drive Car Number 58

or --

A. Well, he did until they were getting

another new cab. And, of course, when they

got another new cab, it would be a different

number. And he would always -- well, you bid

on your cabs according to your seniority. So

he would -- when the new ones come out, he

would be able to get a different cab. 58, he

had drove it for about -- I guess it was a

couple of years old or something like that,

that he drove all the time.

Q. Did he have a particular route that

he drove on?

A. He -- well, of course, he got

different calls here in the city. But mostly

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1239

he played the airport -- what we call

"played the airport." In other words, he --

Q. Drove the airport route?

A. Mm-hum.

Q. Now, did you see Mr. Butler on April

4, 1968?

A. Yes, sir, I sure did.

Q. Did you ever see Mr. Butler again

after April 4, 1968?

A. No, sir, I sure didn't.

Q. Now, would you tell this Court how

you saw Mr. Butler and when you first heard

from him and how you saw him on April 4,

1968.

A. Well, I was sitting at Quince and

Kirby in a service station. I called and

reported where I was sitting waiting on a

call. And I heard Paul come in on the radio

and -- well, I couldn't hear him, but he

talked to the dispatcher. And the dispatcher

called his name, that's the reason I knew he

was talking to Paul. And I heard him say,

I'll send an ambulance. And so --

Q. You heard the dispatcher say "I'll

send an ambulance"?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1240

A. Send an ambulance, yeah. And so I

knew then that somebody had gotten hurt. I

didn't know whether it was another cab driver

or not. And then the dispatcher -- he

started repeating what Paul said. He said,

you mean that Dr. Martin Luther King has been

shot? And he said yes. And he said, well,

I'll send an ambulance. And he said, I don't

believe an ambulance can help him. Because

he would repeat it back so I knew what he was

saying. And he said, well, I'll send an

ambulance anyhow and send the police.

He told him -- he says, when you

call the police, tell them that the man who

shot him is headed towards the squad car just

sitting about a half a block north towards

the hotel.

Q. Now, let me back you up a little

bit. How are you hearing this conversation?

Is the dispatcher repeating what he's

hearing?

A. He was repeating, yes, sir. He was

repeating what Paul was saying.

Q. And what did he say? What did he

repeat that he heard Paul broadcasting?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1241

A. Well, he had -- he just repeated that

Dr. Martin Luther King had got shot and

then -- of course, he repeated that he would

send an ambulance and send a squad car and --

call the police rather. And that's whenever

Paul came back and told him there's a squad

car sitting north -- about a half a block

north of the motel. And that the man who

shot him was heading towards the squad car.

And -- of course, when he -- well,

he -- of course, I went out and talked to him

later on and got the message good of what he

was saying.

Q. Let's move -- let's move to that. So

you heard this exchange on the radio.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. What did you do after that?

A. Well, I told the guy at the service

station -- I said, Martin Luther King just

got shot. He laughed at me. He said, you

see that box sitting up on the pump? He

said, that would be the first thing that come

on it. And I said, no. I said, he just got

shot. It would have to go to where that box

is coming from before you get it. I headed

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1242

from there to my home which at that time was

4935 -- 3549 Kay, which is about two -- two

and a half miles.

And I drove in and told my wife the

same thing. And she had the television on.

She said the same thing. Well, I was there

about two minutes when it came on that he had

been shot but not serious. And I said, well,

the guy said that it looked like he had a

stick of dynamite in his mouth. It blew his

jaw off and part of his vertebrae is out of

his neck. And I said, he's going to the

airport and there's no calls coming in, so

I'm heading to the airport. So I did. So I

went out there, and there's where I found

Paul out there, so --

Q. You then drove to the airport --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- and looked for Paul?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And you found him?

A. Yes, sir. He was sitting out there.

Q. And did you -- did you talk to him?

A. Yes, sir, I sure did. Because I --

you know, I was interested in knowing just

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1243

exactly what happened. So -- of course, what

he told me, that the passenger that he picked

up he believed knew something about it. Of

course, he said I was looking -- I was

loading stuff in the trunk. And there was so

much stuff, I could not get it all in my

trunk, had to put some in the back seat.

While I was placing it in the trunk,

he said, I was looking in the direction where

the guy was going to shoot. Before the shot,

he punched me and said, look up there,

Dr. Martin Luther King is standing up there

by himself, not a soul with him. He said,

that's something you don't usually see. And

as I raised up and looked, that rifle

popped -- it didn't sound like a rifle, it

sounded like two boards clapped together.

And he said, I seen his jaw and part of his

neck blowed away. It was like he had a stick

of dynamite in his mouth. He said, as I

wheeled and looked, I seen a cluster of smoke

coming up out of the bushes, and then I seen

the guy come running up. He didn't have no

rifle. But he said, I know that he is the

one that had to shoot him. And then he

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1244

headed towards the -- headed north towards

the squad car.

And, of course, we thought the

police had picked him up. Because it was a

black and white squad car. Of course, the

black and white squad car at that time takes

care of traffic. The blue squad cars was

really the police. But this was a black and

white squad car. But we thought they had

picked him up. So he told the dispatcher.

He said, did you hear the tires were

squealing? And he said, yes, I could hear

the tires were squealing.

Q. So he's telling you that after the

shot he saw a man come out of the bushes --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- run up north on Mulberry Street --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- and get into a squad car -- a

traffic --

A. Traffic squad car, black and white,

mm-hum.

Q. Which was parked where?

A. He said about a half a block north of

the motel.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1245

Q. And then what happened to that car?

A. Well, he said they headed north. We

thought he picked -- well, he come back on

the radio and said the police has picked him

up and they headed north with him. You could

hear the tires were squealing. So we thought

the police had already picked up the guy that

done the shooting.

Q. I see. So both you and Mr. Butler

had thought that the police had apprehended

the shooter.

A. Yes.

Q. What happened next? Did any police

come out to the airport?

A. Yes. While I'm standing there

talking, a squad car drove up with a

lieutenant and a patrolman. They got out.

Well, I didn't see the squad car as it drove

up. But they walked up as I was talking to

Mr. Butler. And the lieutenant had a pad.

So he had taken the same report that

Mr. Butler had gave me and the rest of us --

because there are several of us cab drivers

standing around.

And the lieutenant wrote the report

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1246

down that he had and told him that they would

be back in contact with him. So they got in

the squad car and left after they got the

report.

Q. So they took a report from Mr. Butler

and they -- they left. Where were you

standing when that report was being taken?

A. Oh, probably -- when they came up, I

was standing up next to him. When they came

up, I backed away, probably 3 or 4 feet out

of their way, where they would have plenty of

clearance. But I was close enough that he

gave them the same report that he gave me.

Q. You overheard this report being

given?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. All right. Then what happened next?

A. Well, they called -- the dispatcher

called him to come in to the headquarters.

We have a headquarters. Said he was wanted

down there. Well, later on that night, not

too much later, I was in town and drove by

the cab company and there was several squad

cars down there. And I figured that they

were, you know, taking some more reports.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1247

And then I found out later that he was

supposed to be at court at 9 o'clock the next

morning.

Q. He was supposed to give a

statement --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- the next morning? And how many

squad cars were around Yellow's offices that

night?

A. There were several. I would say

seven or eight. Might have been more, might

have been five or six. But I just noticed

there were several squad cars sitting there.

I didn't count them.

Q. Seven or eight Memphis Police

Department cars around Yellow's headquarters

that night?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Okay. You didn't see Mr. Butler at

that time, did you?

A. No, I sure didn't. I didn't go in.

I just drove by and seen it. There were so

many squad cars down there, I just pulled on

because I didn't --

Q. What time did you get home that --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1248

that evening on the 4th of April?

A. I was -- I drove all night that

night. I was the only cab driver that drove

all night that night. And -- but I stayed

out there. And, of course, I seen police

heading out there. And, of course, they had

a curfew. Everybody was in. They called the

cabs in. But I just stayed out there and

drove because I had plenty of business, and I

stayed out there and drove all night that

night.

Q. Right. You drove all night and you

went in -- went home the next morning?

A. Next morning, yes, sir.

Q. When did you next go to Yellow Cab's

offices, Mr. Ward?

A. It was about two weeks. Because,

see, they -- I was security police out at the

time out at the Depot. My wife -- when I got

home, she said there had been a call for me

to come out there. So I went out there, and

we stayed on duty 24 hours a day for a whole

week -- all of the security people did. And

then it was about two weeks.

Q. It was about two weeks before you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1249

reported back to Yellow --

A. Yes.

Q. -- to go to work?

A. To drive a cab.

Q. And would you tell us what happened

when you reported to work at that time?

A. Well, I was out at the airport and

picked up a gentleman. And he was -- of

course, he was with the FBI. I mean, we had

had dealings with him out at the airport, and

I knew him when I picked him up. So on the

way in, I asked him -- I said, what are you

doing in town? And he said, who am I talking

to? So I raised my cap up. And he said,

Mr. Ward, what are you a policeman or a cab

driver? And I said, well, I don't make money

like the FBI. I have to be both guys. So

we, you know, laughed about it.

He said, you know why I'm in town so

why do you ask? And I said, well, I figured

that's why you're in here, but I'm just

wondering. And he said that's -- well,

that's why I'm here. And, of course --

Q. Then did you go into -- into Yellow's

offices?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1250

A. No, I brought him on down to the

motel is where I brought him. I brought him

to the Peabody Hotel is where I --

Q. When was the next time you actually

went into the offices and --

A. Oh, it was -- well, I went into the

office when I first came back to work. I

went in then. That's when I -- I asked him

about Mr. Butler.

Q. Who did you ask about Mr. Butler?

A. There was four or five cab drivers

standing around talking. And I just asked

them. And that's when they told me -- I

don't even remember which one told me. But

he said he had been throwed out of a high-

speed automobile between Memphis and West

Memphis. And they found him about 10 o'clock

the next day.

Q. They said he was thrown out of a

high-speed automobile. When was he thrown

out of that automobile?

A. The next -- the next morning. They

said they found his body about 10 o'clock or

10:30 the next morning. He was supposed to

have been in court at 9 o'clock that morning

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1251

and he wasn't there. They found his car

there at the cab company. And -- but he

wasn't -- he wasn't -- never made it to

court. But then about 10:30 they said they

found his body between Memphis and West

Memphis.

Q. They found his body between Memphis

and West Memphis?

A. On the old -- on the old highway. Of

course, they didn't have the other highway at

that time. It was just --

Q. Would it have been the old -- the old

bridge or was it off the bridge?

A. From what they said, it was off the

bridge. They said between Memphis and West

Memphis so I figured it was probably

somewhere along that straight stretch that he

was throwed out.

Q. And did they say what car he was

thrown out of?

A. No, sir, they just --

Q. Just said he was thrown out?

A. A high-speed car. They just found

his body. And they said he had been throwed

out of a high-speeded automobile. And that's

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1252

all I got. I got the paper. I thought I'd

read about it. And, of course, at that time

they had the Press Center and the Commercial

Appeal. And I went from page to page and

there wasn't never nothing put in the paper

about -- about it, so -- and --

Q. You never read anything in the

newspaper about it?

A. No, sir.

Q. About the death?

A. No, sir.

Q. Did you believe the story that you

were being told by your --

A. Well, yes. I didn't see him. Of

course, the boys -- I mean, they all walked

up and told me. Yes, I had no doubt not to

believe it. In fact, that's -- I never did

see nothing -- nobody else about it. I mean,

being he got killed, I didn't -- I wasn't

ready to go then, so -- I'm still not ready

to go, but I feel a little bit more better

now than I did then.

Q. Many years later.

A. Yes, sir, many years later.

Q. Did you ever tell this story to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1253

anyone?

A. Yes, sir. You know, didn't nobody

believe me. It was just like that guy I

talked to at the service station. I wonder

what he thought later on when it came on his

box, what he called it, what had happened.

But I told the people about it. And then a

year or so later say something about it, and

they never heard a thing about it. And I

said, you didn't believe me the first time I

told you, did you? So I just mostly kept it

to myself then.

Q. Did the -- did you ever tell this

story to the FBI?

A. Yes, sir. I -- well, I called -- his

name -- Mr. Pungetti (phonetic), I believe

was his name. He was a district attorney

here. And I read a piece in the paper where

he was so sure that James Earl Ray killed him

and he didn't want nothing else said about

it. So I called and I never could get to

talk to him. And, of course, Mr. Veasley --

he used to be my Sunday school teacher. I

got a hold of him. He was the Assistant

District Attorney at the time. And I asked

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1254

him, can I talk to Mr. Pungetti? And he said

yes. So -- he said, I'll get you on with

him.

Well, I asked him -- I told him, I

said, I read what you put in the paper that

you were so sure that James Earl Ray killed

him and you didn't want nothing else said

about it. And I said, what makes you so

sure? And he said, well, what makes you sure

he didn't? And I said, well, I know he

didn't.

And -- so -- but you're so sure. I

said, was you driving the squad car that

hauled -- of course, he was a policeman back

at that time. I said, were you -- were you

driving that squad car that hauled the man

who shot him away? And he hung up on me.

Q. He hung up on you?

A. So I don't know whether he was

driving the squad car or not.

Q. An unanswered question. Have the

police ever questioned you or asked you about

this?

A. No, sir.

Q. Any government agency ever come to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1255

you and ask you about this?

A. No, sir. The only one I talked to

was the FBI that -- that I was -- I mean, I

knew him when I seen him. I knew him because

he had been out at the depot back when I was

in security. Well, of course, we had several

FBI's out there that would have things that

come up. So I just happened to know -- I

knew him when I seen him. And he was the one

that I brought in that -- and I never -- and

I never ever saw him since, so --

Q. So it's your testimony here today

that Paul Butler died being thrown out of a

high-speed automobile?

A. As far as I know he did.

Q. On the -- on the night of the

assassination of Martin Luther King on the

4th of April, 1968?

A. Well, they said about 10 o'clock the

next morning when they found him. In other

words, this happened late in the afternoon

that Dr. Martin Luther King got shot. And

this was some time the next morning. I don't

know what time he was throwed out of it. Of

course, he might have been throwed out that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1256

night. But his car was found at the cab

company, and he couldn't be found at that

time because they had called around trying to

contact him.

And then at about 10:30 that's when

they said they found his body.

Q. They found his body the next morning?

A. Right, about 10:30.

Q. About 10:30. Some time prior to

that --

A. He was throwed out.

Q. -- he was thrown out of the

automobile -- high-speed automobile

supposedly. And you never saw him again?

A. No, sir.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you,

Mr. Ward. Nothing further.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Mr. Ward, you first called me a few

years ago and pretty much told me this same

version, didn't you, that you had tried to

tell the police about it and different ones,

but no one would listen to you?

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1257

Q. Basically. Let me ask you -- now,

when you were at the airport with Mr. Butler,

did you -- did he tell this same version to

the lieutenant and the other officers that

were there? You heard him tell them what had

happened?

A. Yes, sir. Because I was standing

there, and he told them practically the same

thing he did me.

Q. And he told them he had seen someone

get in the police car and leave and they were

escorted away in a squad car?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And they were writing that down all

that time; is that right, sir?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. You had tried to make this known for

some several years, and no one would listen

to you, didn't you?

A. That's right.

MR. GARRISON: That's all I

have.

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Mr. Ward, an author recently -- well,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1258

the last year or so wrote a book establishing

James Earl Ray as the -- the killer in this

case in his view. Have you been interviewed

by any author who has published and who is

interested in this case?

A. No, sir, I haven't.

Q. You never told that story to anyone?

A. No, sir.

MR. PEPPER: Thanks very much,

Mr. Ward. Nothing further.

THE COURT: All right. You may

stand down, sir. You can remain in the

courtroom or you can leave.

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: Call your next

witness.

MR. PEPPER: Plaintiffs call

Mr. Raymond Kohlman to the stand.

RAYMOND KOHLMAN,

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Kohlman.

A. Good afternoon.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1259

Q. Thank you for joining us.

A. Certainly.

Q. Would you please state your full name

and address for the record.

A. Raymond D. Kohlman, K O H L M A N.

And my office is at 7 North Main Street,

Attleboro, Massachusetts.

Q. And what do you do for a living,

Mr. Kohlman?

A. I'm an attorney.

Q. And where are you licensed to

practice law?

A. Presently in the Commonwealth of

Massachusetts.

Q. And have you, in the course of these

proceedings and in preparation for this

trial, assisted the plaintiffs with certain

investigative work?

A. Yes, I have.

Q. And would you tell the Court and the

jury what your assignment was in terms of

this matter.

A. I was asked to go to the public

library and to determine the listing for a

Betty Butler or a Paul L. Butler, either

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1260

separately or together. During that

investigation, I found -- I did it from 1966

through 1970 -- those years in the Polk

reference books.

Q. Let me show you a page from Polk,

Page 210, 1966. Is that the page that you

photocopied from Polk for 1966?

A. I can't see it too clearly. But it

is a page because I put -- specifically put a

yellow marking on it.

MR. PEPPER: Let's -- let's do

this. Let's pass these up to Mr. Kohlman so

that he can look at them.

A. Yes, that's Page 210, 1966.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Right. And would you

read the highlighted insert there?

A. It's Paul (Betty), driver, Yellow

Cab, H, which is the house, 339 East South

Parkway.

Q. Okay. That is the address of Paul

and Betty Butler in 1966 listed in Polk

publication, and Paul is listed as a Yellow

Cab driver?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. I'd like to show you the next page.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1261

A. This is, again, Polk. All these

pages would be from Polk. 1967. It's Page

158. The listing is for Paul -- again,

(Betty), and it is 2639 -- it doesn't give a

street. This street is -- it doesn't show up

here, Apartment P1.

Q. Okay. Let me ask you to look at

this.

A. This is from '68. It's Page 157.

And the listing is Betty L. (wid. -- which is

the abbreviation for widow -- Paul), branch

manager, Gridiron Systems, 2639 Central

Avenue, Apartment P1.

Q. May we have that back so we can zoom

in for the jury. That listing then is 1968,

and it shows Paul -- it shows Betty is a

widow -- listed as a widow of Paul.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. So for the first time we see Betty

listed as a widow of Paul Butler.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Here's the next one.

A. This is Page 163 from 1969. And the

listing here is for Betty L. (wid., Paul)

branch manager, Gridiron System, 2639 Central

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1262

Avenue, Apartment P1.

Q. This is another listing for the year

1969. Betty is still listed a widow of

Paul --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- at that point in time?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Now, it's your testimony that you

extracted and copied each of these pages.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Let me show you this, Mr. Kohlman.

Would you tell the jury what you're holding?

A. This is a request for a death

certificate that was submitted by me to the

Shelby County -- Memphis and Shelby County

Health Department. I went in there to seek

certification of the death of Paul L.

Butler. After the clerk went through 1968 --

and I just dealt with 1968 -- she determined

that there was no death certificate for that

year for Paul L. Butler, and she signed and

dated and gave her clerical number.

Q. Mr. Kohlman, did you also call the --

a similar agency of the State of Arkansas?

A. Yes. Because of where the body

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1263

supposedly -- where the murder supposedly

occurred, the cab was found halfway between

here and Arkansas, wherever, I contacted --

actually, I went over to Crittenden County

Health Department. They don't keep records

back that far. They suggested I get a hold

of Little Rock Vital Records Department.

I did that yesterday morning and

spoke with -- I had to speak with a

supervisor, a Mrs. Carson. And she went

through -- she stated that she went through

the records for 1968 looking for

Mr. Butler -- Paul L.

Q. So is it your testimony then that you

could not find any official records of the

death of Mr. Paul Butler either in Tennessee

or in Arkansas?

A. Correct. There is -- as far as the

official records are concerned, Memphis/

Shelby County, no record of death for

Mr. Butler. And as far as Tennessee is

concerned, for 1968 there was no record of

Mr. Butler's demise.

Q. Thank you, Mr. Kohlman.

A. Thank you.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1264

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further,

Your Honor.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, I

have no questions.

THE COURT: You may stand down,

sir.

THE WITNESS: Thank you.

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: All right.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiffs have five minutes of film

testimony of a witness from California who

could not be here. We tried desperately to

get him here. He is a former newspaper

journalist for the New York Times. And it

was taken in the television trial

proceeding. He was cross-examined by former

U.S. Attorney, Hickman Ewing. In the

beginning he's giving testimony under direct

examination. We would like to play that.

And we also move at this time that

the documentation of Mr. Kohlman we covered

on -- for the plaintiffs be admitted into

evidence.

THE COURT: Any objections?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1265

MR. GARRISON: No, Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right.

(Whereupon said documents were

marked as Collective Exhibit Number 24.)

MR. PEPPER: The name of the

witness, Your Honor, is Mr. Earl Caldwell.

(Whereupon the videotape was

played for the Court and Jury.)

FROM THE VIDEO:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Back in April of 1968, for which

paper were you writing then?

A. I was writing for the New York Times.

Q. You were a New York Times reporter?

A. Yes.

Q. And were you given an assignment to

Memphis, Tennessee, in April of '68?

A. Yes, I was.

Q. And what was your -- what was your

assignment?

A. Well, at that time Claude Sitton

(phonetic) was the national editor of the

paper, and I was working as a national

correspondent. And I was told to go to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1266

Memphis, Tennessee. And we had a meeting.

And at this meeting he told me that he had

gotten information that Dr. King now had

people as a part -- that were a part of his

group that he couldn't control. Said he

could no longer control his people. And

that -- he explained some of that to me. And

I remember the last words were he wanted me

to go to Memphis and nail Dr. King.

Q. And now we're on the -- we're on the

last hour of Dr. King's life.

A. Right.

Q. And at 6 o'clock -- at 6 p.m., where

are you standing and what are you doing?

A. At that moment I heard what I was

sure was a bomb blast. I ran to the -- I ran

to -- into the doorway to see what happened.

Because I was sure the motel had been

bombed. As it happened, the first thing I

saw when I looked out the door was a figure

in the bushes directly -- I would say

directly across to the right of where I was

looking when I looked out.

Q. And what was that figure doing?

A. Well, I couldn't tell. He was doing

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1267

something in the bushes. I didn't know what

he was doing. At that moment it was like he

was the key to what had happened in my mind.

Q. Has any FBI agent ever asked you what

you saw?

A. No. No one asked me ever. No FBI

agents, no local police, no authorities at

all.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. EWING:

Q. How did you know to go to the

Lorraine Motel?

A. Because I had called ahead to

Memphis -- to the SCLC headquarters telling

them who I was. I wanted to know where he

was staying, and I was going to stay at the

same motel.

Q. Then would you have talked to them on

the 1st or the 31st?

A. Yes, I -- all those days.

Q. And you -- you found out from them --

A. Yes.

Q. -- that they were going to stay at

the Lorraine when they came to Memphis.

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1268

Q. Would you come over here and approach

this chart?

A. Right. Right.

Q. Point to where you say you were

staying at the hotel -- or motel.

A. (Indicating) I would have -- I think

my room would have been about like right in

here or something like that.

Q. So you come to the door when you hear

the bomb blast and you're standing there in

your shorts --

A. Right.

Q. -- and you look --

A. Right.

Q. And where do you say this man was in

the bushes?

A. He was right here in the heavy part

of the bushes. These bushes, mind you -- I

say "bushes." They were pretty high. They

were really high. They were like -- they

weren't bushes. You say bushes, like knee-

high. They're much higher than that.

Q. Could you stand right over here so

everybody can see you. Would you describe

what you saw the man do. In other words, get

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1269

down there and let's go through what you say

you saw out there.

A. Well, okay. I -- mind you, there are

these bushes there. And I -- when I'm seeing

this guy for the first time, he's in some

kind of a position. But I can't tell whether

he's like this or whether he's like this or

whether he's like this. I really don't

know. But he was in some kind of a position

that was not a stand-up position.

Q. Okay. Did you see him with a gun?

A. No.

Q. So when you see him and he's in the

bushes, is he twisting toward this way or is

he --

A. No.

Q. -- twisting this way?

A. When I seen him first, he was looking

at something over towards --

Q. Towards the motel?

A. Towards the motel, yes, right.

Q. Did he look up when he twisted?

A. He was still looking over to the

balcony.

Q. Was this man white or black?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1270

A. He was white.

Q. What was he wearing?

A. I don't know. I thought it was some

kind of a coveralls or something. I said --

in my notes I said I thought he was in

coveralls or something like that. I couldn't

really be sure.

Q. Over the years, up until recently,

you -- were you aware that the House

Committee looked into this?

A. Yes, I was.

Q. And did you -- did you offer to tell

them what you saw?

A. I didn't think it was my place to

offer to them. But I did write in the

newspaper and saw to it it was published --

what I knew and why I knew it.

MR. EWING: Thank you.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor, that

being the last witness available to the --

(End of the videotape portion.)

MR. PEPPER: Plaintiffs move

admission of that testimony.

THE COURT: Any objection?

MR. GARRISON: I don't have any

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1271

objection.

THE COURT: All right.

(Whereupon said videotape was

marked as Trial Exhibit Number 25.)

MR. PEPPER: Plaintiffs next

witness will take a little bit of time, Your

Honor. Would the Court like to break?

THE COURT: Okay. We'll break

for lunch and resume at 2:30.

(Lunch Recess.)

THE COURT: Bring the jury out,

please, sir.

THE SHERIFF: Yes, sir.

(Jury In.)

THE COURT: All right. We're

ready.

MR. PEPPER: Yes, Your Honor.

Plaintiffs call their first witness, Mr. Roy

Grabow.

ROY A. GRABOW,

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Grabow. Thank

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1272

you for coming all this way up from

Mississippi to be here.

A. Thank you.

Q. Would you state your full name and

address for the record.

A. Roy Allen Grabow.

Q. Would you please pull up a bit in the

chair there.

A. Roy Allen Grabow.

THE COURT: Spell your last

name, please.

THE WITNESS: G R A B O W.

THE COURT: Thank you.

THE WITNESS: Thank you.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) And what is your

address, please.

A. 1206 Church Street, Boonville,

Mississippi.

Q. And we're taking you somewhat out of

turn, Mr. Grabow, because of an illness of

your -- your wife.

A. Right.

Q. Can you tell the Court what is --

what is the problem -- medical problem?

A. From a car wreck.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1273

Q. And what is her present physical

condition -- Glenda Grabow's present physical

condition?

A. Her rib is cracked, broke, and it's

pressing against her and she's bleeding

internally a little bit.

Q. Has she been instructed not to be

transported here?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. What I'd like to do is move ahead

with you in this testimony to the extent of

your personal knowledge.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. What you know, not what you have been

told or know from her but what you know

personally.

A. Right. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you live in Houston, Texas, with

your wife in the early 1960's?

A. Yes, sir, I did.

Q. And at that time when you were living

in Houston, Texas, what was the -- where was

the area where you resided?

A. Around Hobby Airport.

Q. Around the Hobby Airport.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1274

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And at that time did you see a -- an

individual who has been described in these

proceedings as -- as Raul?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. Let me, just for the purposes of

identification, show you a spread of

photographs. Do you see a likeness of Raul

in -- amongst those images?

A. Yes, I do.

Q. Which one is Raul as you knew him?

A. Number 4.

Q. Number --

A. 4.

Q. Number 4.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Second hand --

A. Middle one on the right, yes, sir.

Q. Thank you. Where did you see this

person in Houston?

A. Oh, where I used to gas up on the --

the service station where I used to gas up at

on College Street.

Q. Did your wife also -- to the best of

your knowledge, did your wife also know this

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1275

person and become acquainted with him?

A. Yes, she did.

Q. All right. Mr. Grabow, I'm going to

show you two affidavits that have been

executed before a notary by Glenda Grabow and

ask you if you were present when these

affidavits were sworn -- written and sworn by

your wife.

A. Yes, sir.

MR. PEPPER: Okay. I'll move

their admission, Your Honor.

(Whereupon said documents were

marked as Trial Exhibit Number 26.)

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) I'm going to show you

a series of photographs and ask you if you

recognize the individuals and/or the places

here. Do you recognize the two people in

that photograph?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And who are they?

A. Amaro and my daughter, Connie.

Q. That's your daughter Connie on the

right, and the other man is --

A. Amaro.

Q. Amaro. And to the best of your

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1276

knowledge, what is the relationship between

Amaro and Raul?

A. Either a cousin or an uncle. I'm not

real certain, but it's one of the two.

Q. Some relative, cousin or another.

A. Yes.

Q. Did you see much of Amaro?

A. Quite often.

Q. Quite a bit?

A. I knew him quite well, yes.

Q. All right. I'm going to show you

another photograph. Get these photographs

right. Who are the people in this

photograph?

A. That's my daughter, Connie, on the

right, me, Amaro and my wife Glenda.

Q. Let's eliminate any confusion. Where

is your daughter Connie? Is this --

A. That's Connie.

Q. This is your daughter Connie. And

this is you?

A. That's me.

Q. This is --

A. My wife, Glenda, and Amaro.

Q. And this is Amaro here. Where was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1277

that taken, do you know?

A. Tokyo Garden.

Q. I'm sorry.

A. Tokyo Garden.

Q. Tokyo Garden?

A. Restaurant, yes.

Q. Where is that?

A. Houston, Texas, in west town.

Q. And about what time was that

photograph taken?

A. You mean date or --

Q. Yes, the approximate date.

A. It was in -- probably about '73.

Q. It was in the early 70's?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you recognize that building?

A. Yes, I do. Yes, I do. It belongs to

Felix Tareno.

Q. It -- or it belonged to --

A. Well, yes.

Q. -- then Felix Tareno.

A. Yes.

Q. Had you ever seen the person whose

been identified as Raul on those premises?

A. Yes, I have.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1278

Q. Where have you seen him on those

premises?

A. On the porch.

Q. On the porch. Was that building

the -- to the best of your personal

knowledge, was that building the scene of

some unpleasantness involving your wife --

A. Yes, it was.

Q. -- and Raul?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. It was.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Was there a time when you and your

wife went together to visit Attorney Percy

Foreman?

A. Yes, there was.

Q. Where did you visit Attorney Foreman?

A. Where? At his office.

Q. At his office?

A. Yes.

Q. And what was the purpose of that

visit?

A. I hired him for my brother.

Q. Sorry.

A. I hired him for my brother.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1279

Q. Your brother had a --

A. Case, yes, sir.

Q. Had a case. And when you went into

Attorney Foreman's office, did you notice

anything of particular interest concerning

this case?

A. They -- they had some books and

papers in the office pertaining to it, yes,

sir.

Q. Pertaining to Mr. Foreman's

representation?

A. Yes. Yes.

Q. And did your -- did Attorney Foreman

give your wife a drawing of himself?

A. Yes, he did.

Q. And was that drawing signed by him?

A. Yes, it was. To her from him.

Q. Right. And the subject of your --

of -- of your visit and the relationship with

Foreman is covered in these affidavits sworn

by your wife?

A. Yes.

Q. Is that right?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Now, when did you leave Houston,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1280

Texas, and move to Mississippi?

A. When -- we come down in 1980, stayed

for six months, sold my house in Houston.

And went back to Houston, finalized it, and

moved to Mississippi in '81 -- 1981.

Q. Mr. Grabow, why did you leave

Houston, Texas?

A. Threats.

Q. Sorry.

A. Threats. Mr. Foreman said to get out

of town or we would be dead within a year.

Q. Let's back up on that again. There

were threats to you?

A. Threats to my wife and me.

Q. Threats to your wife and you?

A. Yes.

Q. And Mr. Foreman told you what?

A. To get out of town within a year or

we would be dead.

Q. Get out of town within the year or

you'd be dead?

A. That's right.

Q. Who wanted to kill you and your wife,

Mr. Grabow?

A. Well, I don't know. From what he

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1281

told my wife, it was from Raul.

Q. What did that all have to do with,

these threats? Do you know what all that had

to do with?

A. What do you mean?

Q. What was behind the threats? What

caused the threats?

A. My wife --

Q. From your knowledge, what was behind

it?

A. I don't really know. From what --

this is what my wife knows -- most of it.

Mine would just be what I know from her.

Q. Well, we're not going to ask you to

testify about that.

A. But I know it was pertaining to Raul

and the Ray case.

Q. Something to do with Raul and the

Ray case?

A. Right. I know that much.

Q. Did there come a time in Houston,

Texas -- after you left you sold your house

and -- finally in what year?

A. In -- we finally sold it in '81.

Q. 1981?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1282

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you go back there in subsequent

years to Houston at all?

A. Yes.

Q. To visit?

A. I went down and worked for a while on

account of my daughter, Connie. She had a

lot of problems -- medical problems. I went

back to where a good hospital was.

Q. All right.

A. I worked down there for about five or

six months on a job that --

Q. At one point later on when you were

living in Mississippi, did you become aware

again of the man you've identified as Raul?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And how did that happen?

A. My wife called him and talked to him.

Q. Your wife called him and talked to

him. How did your wife get his telephone

number? How did she become aware of where he

was?

A. Look in the phone book, called

information to find him.

Q. How did she know which phone book to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1283

look in? Did someone show her some

information, or how did she become aware of

his presence and where he was living?

A. I don't know exactly. I don't know

exactly.

Q. But somehow she became aware --

A. Yes.

Q. -- of his presence.

A. Right.

Q. And somehow she obtained his phone

number.

A. Right.

Q. But you weren't present when she did

that, or you don't know exactly how she

obtained it.

A. No.

Q. Okay.

A. There was some things she kept from

me.

Q. You testify to what you know, please,

sir.

A. Yes, sir. That's what I'm doing.

Q. Now, Mr. Grabow, I'm going to show

you an original telephone bill dated the 5th

of May, 1995.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1284

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Is that your telephone bill?

A. Yes, it is.

Q. For that period of time?

A. Yes, sir. Yes, it is.

Q. It has your phone number on there?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Do you see a telephone call made on

the 20th of April?

A. Yes, I do.

Q. What time of day was that call made?

A. What time of day? 12:54 p.m.

Q. And how long was that call?

A. Six minutes.

Q. Were you present when that call was

made?

A. Yes, I was.

Q. And who was that call made to?

A. Raul in Yonkers, New York.

Q. And who made the call to Raul?

A. My wife, Glenda.

Q. I'm not asking you to comment on even

one side of the conversation. Did you have

the impression that this telephone call --

that the parties speaking on this telephone

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1285

call, one of them was your wife, knew the

other party?

A. Oh, yes.

Q. That they were familiar?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Would your wife ever talk on the

telephone with someone for six minutes she

didn't know?

A. No.

Q. Or didn't know her?

A. No. She didn't like to talk on the

phone anyway. Very seldom.

Q. But in this instance she was talking

on the phone for six minutes.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. That's the second longest call on

this -- on this bill, isn't it?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. I'm going to show you a copy of this

bill, and we've blocked out Raul's telephone

number.

A. Okay.

Q. I would like you to compare the copy

with the original and tell us whether they

are identical except for the redacting of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1286

Raul's telephone number.

A. Yes, they are.

Q. Well, please, would you look at all

of the pages.

A. Oh, all of the pages. Okay. Yes,

sir.

MR. PEPPER: That being the

case, Your Honor, plaintiffs move the

admission of the copy with the redacted

telephone number.

THE COURT: All right.

(Whereupon said document was

marked as Trial Exhibit Number 27.)

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Mr. Grabow, have any

investigators -- official investigators of

the United States Government or any police

authority discussed with you or your wife

information that you may have about this man,

Raul?

A. About -- lately or --

Q. At any time.

A. No. I think the -- the men from

homicide in Memphis here came down to talk to

us one time.

Q. Somebody did come down?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1287

A. Yes, sir.

Q. How long ago was that?

A. Last year.

Q. Did you tell or did your wife tell

everything --

A. Yes, she did.

Q. -- that she knows about this?

A. Yes, she did.

Q. Did you hear anything further --

A. No.

Q. -- with respect --

A. We have come back up and talked to

them because some of the things she said was

changed on the affidavit. She made an oral

affidavit. And when he typed it out and

showed it, we had to change a lot because

some of the things was changed on there.

Q. The statement that she gave was not

the same statement that was printed that she

was asked to sign?

A. Yes, some things were.

Q. It was different?

A. Yes, some things.

Q. Did you effect those changes? Did

you make -- ensure that they made those

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1288

changes?

A. What we could. What we could, yes.

It took so long. She don't read so fast.

And it was taking an awful long time for her

to. So we changed what she could.

Q. This Court has heard evidence that

your wife has given a lengthy, almost auto-

biographical, statement to an English film

producer, Jack Saltman. Do you know that

that's the case?

A. Well, it's -- I don't know what it

was. If I understood it -- we thought we was

working with a lawyer and stuff. And she

talked to him a long time. And I think they

was trying to make some kind of movie deal or

something. I don't know what it was.

Q. So they took a statement?

A. Yes, they did. Yes, they did.

Q. You thought you were working --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- with whom?

A. I thought we were working with the

lawyers for -- attorneys for --

Q. Attorneys for whom?

A. The Rays. I don't know. Ray's

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1289

attorneys, I guess. What we understood is

they just kept running us around keeping us

away from him.

Q. And that went on for a period of

time, didn't it?

A. Yes, it did.

Q. But your wife has discussed with you

all of these events and everything that she

knows at this point in time.

A. Oh, yes.

Q. I'm not going to ask you to say what

these are, but she has discussed these things

with you.

A. Yes, she has.

Q. And whatever it is she has told you

and has discussed with you, has she ever

changed her story over all these years --

A. No.

Q. -- in terms of what has happened to

her?

A. No.

Q. And what has happened to her is

reflected in these affidavits that we have

put into evidence?

A. Right. There are no changes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1290

MR. PEPPER: No changes. Thank

you very much. Nothing further.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Mr. Grabow, would you tell us if the

gentleman who came from Memphis to talk to

you and Mrs. Grabow was a gentleman named

Mark Glankler? Does that sound like his

name? Last year --

A. Glankler?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. I don't think so.

Q. Someone did come and talk to you and

Ms. Grabow from Memphis?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, you called me several years ago

and told me that your wife had some

information and you had been unable to get

her to come forth.

A. Yes, I did.

Q. And you came and talked to me about

it.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. You and your wife.

A. Yes, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1291

Q. Let me ask you, during the time that

you were around this Raul and -- what's his

name, Amaro?

A. Amaro.

Q. Did they ever mention the name of

Loyd Jowers to you? You never heard of that

name, did you?

A. No, sir.

Q. And Mr. Foreman never mentioned the

name of Loyd Jowers, you never heard of him?

A. No, sir. First time I heard it was

when we seen a little piece in the paper and

we called you.

Q. Okay. When your wife talked to this

Raul -- I'm not asking you what she said --

but did she seem pretty sure that that was

the person that she had seen back in the

60's? Was it pretty certain through the

whole conversation that it was the same

person?

A. She was very certain.

Q. She was very certain it was?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did they talk about things that

people who have known each other a long time

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1292

would talk about?

A. I didn't stay in the room that long.

But when she started out talking to him, she

knew him real well.

MR. GARRISON: That's all.

THE COURT: All right, sir. You

may stand down. You can remain in the

courtroom or you're free to leave.

THE WITNESS: Thank you, sir.

(Witness excused.)

MR. PEPPER: Plaintiffs call

Mr. John Smith.

THE COURT: Would you all come

up here a minute.

(A bench conference was held at

sidebar outside the hearing of the jury.)

JOHN C. SMITH,

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Smith.

Mr. Smith, could you please move forward to

the microphone. Thank you for coming here

this afternoon. I know you have been

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1293

hospitalized, and that's why we're calling

you way out of turn in terms of your

knowledge of facts -- particular facts in

this case. We are grateful for you to come.

Would you state your full name for the

record, please.

A. John Charles Smith.

THE COURT: What is it again,

please, sir.

THE WITNESS: John Charles

Smith.

THE COURT: John Charles Smith.

Thank you, sir.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) And have you been a

resident of Memphis for many years?

A. Well, about nine now.

Q. You were away for a period of time?

A. Yes.

Q. Where are you from originally,

Mr. Smith?

A. Memphis.

Q. Memphis. And when did you leave

Memphis?

A. As a kid. I grew up in Los

Angeles -- in Oakland.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1294

Q. All right. And when did you come

back to Memphis?

A. '67.

Q. 1967. How old were you in 1967 when

you returned to Memphis?

A. 25.

Q. Did you join a group called the

Invaders at that point in time?

A. Yes.

Q. Or become associated with them?

A. Yes, more -- more --

Q. And were you active with the Invaders

during the time of the Sanitation Workers'

Strike?

A. Yes.

Q. And during the time when Dr. King

came to Memphis?

A. Yes.

Q. And along with Charles Cabbage and

Covey Smith and others?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, were you at the Lorraine Motel

in April -- on April 4, 1968?

A. Yes, I was.

Q. Would you -- would you tell us when

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1295

you came to the motel.

A. It had to be around 6 -- between 6

and 6:30.

Q. Was that when you arrived at the

hotel or when you -- how long had you been at

the hotel during that day? Let me give you a

benchmark for your -- your movements.

Dr. King was assassinated at 6:01.

A. Right. Well, then I had been around

the Lorraine most of the day off and on.

Q. So you had been around -- prior to

the assassination around the hotel?

A. Yes.

Q. And where were you when you were at

the hotel? Do you recall where you were most

of the time?

A. In the lobby.

Q. In the lobby?

THE COURT: Excuse me just a

minute, Mr. Pepper. There's a beeping going

on some place. Does anyone know the source

of it? I just heard it.

MR. PEPPER: I did hear

something, Your Honor.

THE COURT: There it goes

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1296

again. Okay. You may proceed.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) So you were around

the hotel most of the day and you were around

there in the afternoon?

A. Yes.

Q. And you were in the lobby in the

afternoon?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Did you see earlier in the

afternoon around the lobby in the hotel a

police presence?

A. Yes, there was a black detective who

was sitting in the lobby in the corner.

Q. Right.

A. And I left out, went into the

restaurant. And when I came back out, he had

left.

Q. And what time was it when you came

back out of the restaurant? Do you have any

idea?

A. No, I couldn't tell you the time, but

it was before the shooting though.

Q. Do you have an idea how long it was

before the shooting?

A. Maybe ten minutes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1297

Q. Shortly before?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you see any police around the

hotel in the course of the day?

A. There was a few over at the fire

station and cars riding around the motel.

Q. But in the motel itself --

A. The only one I really saw was him.

Q. Was that one?

A. The one black detective.

Q. Was he in uniform or in plain

clothes?

A. No, plain clothes.

Q. He was in plain clothes. And he was

there up until a few minutes before --

A. Before the shooting.

Q. Some time -- a short time before the

shooting.

A. Yes, about ten minutes before.

Q. You came out and you saw he was gone?

A. Right.

Q. Did you ever see him again on the

premises that afternoon?

A. No, not that night.

Q. Did you ever see any other policemen

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1298

around the motel -- in the area of the motel

itself or inside the motel at the time of the

shooting?

A. No. Most of them were outside --

outside of the property.

Q. Did you -- what did you do after the

shooting yourself?

A. Well, I -- I walked out and walked in

the back lot. There was a cafe back there.

And I was looking for my wife at the time.

Q. All right. Did you at any time look

up into the -- across Mulberry up into the

bushes or the brush area?

A. Not -- I can't remember that.

Q. You can't. Do you remember seeing

any -- anything strange or anything that

caught your attention?

A. Well, it was just that it was just --

everything just became steel. Everybody --

there was no movement outside of the motel,

period. No cars were moving, nobody was

walking.

Q. Still.

A. Yes.

Q. For how long a period of time did

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1299

that stillness take place?

A. Up until -- I guess just before I

headed inside the cafe. It was on the lot of

the motel. And when we came out, it was

all -- it was all over then. There was

traffic everywhere.

Q. It just erupted after the shooting?

A. Yes.

MR. PEPPER: Okay. Nothing

further, Your Honor. Thank you, Mr. Smith.

MR. GARRISON: I don't have any

questions, Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right, sir. You

may step down.

(Witness excused.)

MR. PEPPER: Plaintiffs call

Mr. William Schaap to the stand.

WILLIAM SCHAAP,

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Schaap.

A. Good afternoon.

Q. Would you state your full name and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1300

address for the record, please.

A. My name is William Schaap. My

address is 143 West Fourth Street, New York,

New York.

Q. Could you give us a summary of your

professional background, please.

THE COURT: Before you do that,

spell your last name.

THE WITNESS: I'm sorry.

S C H A A P.

THE COURT: Thank you.

A. I'm an attorney. I graduated from

the University of Chicago Law School in

1964. I've been a practicing lawyer since

then. And I'm a member of the bar of the

State of New York and of the District of

Columbia. I specialized in the 1970's in

military law. I practiced military law in

Asia and Europe. I later became the editor

in chief of the Military Law Reporter in

Washington for a number of years. And in the

70's and 80's I was staff counsel of the

Center for Constitutional Rights in New York

City.

I also in the late 1980's was an

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1301

adjunct professor at John J. College of

Criminal Justice of the City University of

New York where I taught courses on propaganda

and disinformation.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Have you also been

involved in journalism and publishing?

A. Yes, I have. Since 1977 or '78, in

addition to being a practicing lawyer, I've

also been a journalist and a publisher and a

writer specializing in intelligence-related

matters and particularly their relationship

to the media. For more than 20 years I've

been the co-publisher of a magazine called

the "Covert Action Quarterly" which

particularly deals with reporting on

intelligence agencies, primarily U.S.

agencies but also foreign.

I published a magazine for a number

of years called "Lies Of Our Times" which

specifically was a magazine about propaganda

and disinformation. And I've been the

managing director of the Institute for Media

Analysis for a number of years. I also, for

about 20 years now, I think, was one of the

principals in a publishing company called

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1302

Sheraton Square Press that published books

and pamphlets relating to intelligence and

the media.

Q. Do you also write? Have you authored

articles and works?

A. Yes, I do. I've written, oh, dozens

of articles on -- particularly on media and

intelligence. I've edited about seven or

eight books on the subject. I've contributed

sections to a number of other books and

had -- I've -- many of my articles, of

course, have appeared in my own -- our own

publications, but I've also had articles

appear around the world including New York

Times, Washington Post and major media

like -- like those.

I've appeared a lot on radio and

television as an expert on intelligence and

the media. I'm slowing down a bit now

because I'm getting older. But I used to do

a lot of speaking at universities and

colleges around the country and debating

government officials and people connected to

organizations that supported the CIA and the

other -- FBI and the other intelligence

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1303

agencies.

Q. Have you ever testified as an expert

witness in the area of governmental use of

media for disinformation and propaganda?

A. Yes, I have. I've -- I've testified

as an expert in that field in both state and

federal courts in this country. I've

testified in foreign courts. I testified

once before the United Nations on that

subject and once before the U.S. Congress.

Q. Mr. Schaap, I'm going to show you a

copy of a -- of your own CV. It's a summary

of your professional qualifications. I want

you to confirm its accuracy.

A. Yes, that's -- that's my CV that I

prepared.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor, we move

admission of Mr. Schaap's CV and move that he

be accepted as an expert witness in the

matter at hand for the issues of government

use of media or disinformation and propaganda

purposes.

THE COURT: Objections?

MR. GARRISON: I have no

objection.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1304

THE COURT: All right.

(Whereupon said document was

marked as Trial Exhibit Number 28.)

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Mr. Schaap, in the

course of your research, have you had

occasion to study the use of the media by

government agencies?

A. Yes, I have. I've studied many

government reports on the subject. Many, many

books have been written about it and

articles. In fact, I've written many of

those articles.

Q. Can you give the Court and the Jury a

brief summary of the subject indicating the

extent to which this type of activity by

government still takes place?

A. Yes, I can. I -- I won't go into

ancient history, but it should be noted

that -- that governments around the world

have secretly used the media for their

purposes for many hundreds of years, probably

thousands. But certainly from the 16th and

17th century in England on there has been a

great deal of research about the use by

governments -- a secret use of the media.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1305

For our purposes though, the --

particularly relating to the U.S., the most

significant and the first major deliberate

program in this country was during World War

I when President Wilson set up an

organization called the Committee For Public

Information under a public relations

executive -- a man named George Creole.

The purpose of this committee was to

propagandize the war effort against Germany.

This was created immediately after the U.S.

entered World War I in 1917. And in

propagandizing the war effort and war news,

it was the policy of this committee to have

no compunctions about falsifying the news

whenever it was felt that that was necessary

to help the war effort.

Q. Can you give us an example of the

type of falsification of the news that you're

talking about.

A. Yes. They -- the Committee For

Public Information purported very often to

release documents, supposedly genuine

documents, to the press in order to

substantiate whatever particular position

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1306

the -- the Wilson government might have been

taking at the time. And one of the most

famous that happened early in its creation in

1917 was a disinformation campaign to suggest

that the Russian revolutionaries, Lenin in

particular and Trotsky, were actually German

agents being paid by the Kaiser.

The Government and Creole's

committee made up the story. They made up --

created phony documents. They passed it all

to friends in the major newspapers. And

almost immediately this was front page news

around the United States and around the

world.

Q. I'm going to show you a New York

Times headline of that era and see if that's

the kind of falsification you're talking

about.

A. Yes, this is -- the rest of the text

is from an article where that headline

appeared. But that was on the front page of

the New York Times in 1917. And later it

transpired that the documents were -- were

forgeries that had been created by

Mr. Creole. And, of course, it was obvious

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1307

by the current course of history, the Russian

revolutionaries were hardly friends of the

Kaiser.

Q. Yes, indeed.

A. Much less employees.

Q. Can you continue with your summary,

please.

A. Yes. After World War I, the U.S.

continued to be the -- or actually became the

world's leader in the control of

information. Britain had been more pre-

eminent before World War I. But at the end

of the war, the U.S. was really in control of

all the world communication media. And

disinformation was used by the government

sporadically during the inter-war years. It

was particularly used in the red scares of

the 1920's and the creation of dis-

information suggesting various opponents of

the government were communists.

But it wasn't a major aspect of

government policy until the advent of World

War II. And that was when deliberate

disinformation or a structure for emitting

deliberate disinformation became very, very

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1308

important.

Q. What happened at that point in

history to bring about that resurgence?

A. Well, at the very beginning of World

War II there were really two schools of

thought competing, both of which had

government agencies. One that was set up was

called the Office of War Information which

was a civilian organization although it

worked closely with the War Department, as it

was then called. And it was headed by a man

named Elmer Davis who was a very famous

reporter -- journalist.

His philosophy was that the agency

should tell the American people exactly what

was happening -- tell them the truth. If we

lost a battle somewhere in Europe or the

Pacific, we should tell the people we lost

that battle. If we won a battle, we'd tell

them we won it. But he believed that in the

long run we would do best by reporting the

truth.

But at the same time another key

organization that developed during World War

II was the Office of Strategic Services, the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1309

OSS, which was headed by a military man,

William Donovan, who was known as Wild Bill

Donovan, who believed the saying that George

Creole had -- his philosophy from World War

I, which was that you should lie to the

people whenever it's necessary, whenever you

think lying will help maintain morale and win

the war.

This struggle was taking place, of

course, in the context of World War II. And

Donovan won both with President Roosevelt and

afterward with President Truman. His

philosophy that disinformation was a

powerful -- a valuable weapon for a country

to have, and that the disadvantages of lying

to the American people were outweighed by the

advantages of being able to manipulate the

media.

So when the war was over, the Office

of War Information was dissolved. The OSS

was transformed into the CIA. And the CIA

was now existing in peace time, mind you.

World War II is over, and now the CIA is set

up with this information as a major part of

its work and, in fact, as most of the reports

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1310

later pointed out, the largest single part of

the CIA's operations.

The -- within the government at

least, the acceptability of lying to the

public became very widespread and acceptable

even in time of peace. There had been people

who felt, well, it's one thing when you're at

war. But even in time of peace it became

acceptable, and it spread from other

agencies, including the -- the FBI which also

began to engage in media manipulation in a

very, very large way.

Q. So in addition to being a war time

strategy with respect to the security of the

nation and the -- the promulgation of -- of

falsehoods in times of war, this tactic

started to be used in peace time.

A. Exactly. That was the major

difference. Certain things were -- were much

more acceptable or expected over the course

of history in time of war and were generally

supposed to stop when the war was over. Now,

there were people who argued in the late 40's

that the Cold War was a war just like a hot

war, and that was the war that was on, and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1311

that was why we had to do this.

But what really happened is there

were not battles being waged between

soldiers. There was not a hot war going on

anywhere, and yet the -- the infrastructure

that had been set up to spread disinformation

to be able to lie became institutionalized

and became operating at a greater and greater

level.

Q. Mr. Schaap, how is it that some

individuals like yourself have become more

aware of these kinds of practices in our

lifetimes while the mass of the population

has not?

A. Well, it's mostly because -- by

coincidence there were a number of factors

that came together, mostly in the 1970's,

leading to major congressional investigations

of these activities leading some newspapers

to fund serious in-depth investigative

reports. And in the middle and late 70's

there were a series -- a huge series of

congressional reports on intelligence

activities , a whole section of which was

devoted to media activities.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1312

And then there were major exposes in

the New York Times and the Washington Post.

It was sort of the Watergate mentality, I

guess, that allowed this to happen. There

was a window of a few years when exposing

government misconduct, particularly past

government misconduct -- and as far as the

government was concerned, the older the

better. But at least there was a window of

opportunity where this was acceptable even

within the mainstream, the establishment

press. It was not frowned upon as much as it

might have been at other times both before

and since.

Q. Before we go into some specific

instances of this and details, can you

explain to the Court and Jury really how does

disinformation work? And why is it so -- why

is it so successful?

A. Well, you have to understand first

the target of propaganda -- of

disinformation. The consumer of the false

news so to speak is -- in what we're talking

about is the American public in general and

sometimes the public overseas. Dis-

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1313

information is almost always by -- by

definition, about things that the average

person has no separate personal knowledge of,

otherwise it couldn't really work.

I mean, you can't fool the people

you're talking about. You can fool the other

people who don't know about it. You're not

trying to fool the people you're talking

about.

The simplest example is during the

Vietnam War when there was a massive bombing

campaign and the U.S. was bombing Cambodia.

President Nixon and Secretary of State

Kissinger repeatedly made public statements

that we were not dropping bombs in Cambodia.

Well, you couldn't fool the Cambodians who

looked up and saw the bombs falling in their

back yard. They knew you were bombing

Cambodia. But the American people by and

large accepted these statements as truth, and

in fact that was a disinformation campaign

that was later admitted.

You're -- really we're talking about

things that the public has no separate

knowledge of. And it's also reinforced by

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1314

the fact that Americans generally tend to

believe what their government tells them, to

believe that government officials on all

levels generally tell the truth. And that --

if you have that, that absence of skepticism,

it's a major plus for the disinformationists.

And, also, it's very, very unusual

around the world other than in the United

States. In most other countries,

particularly in Europe, it's much more the

opposite. People tend on average to be very

skeptical of their government. If the

Italian government issues a statement, the

average Italian on the street will say it's

probably a lie until you can prove to me

otherwise that it's not a lie. Because

governments lie. That's what they -- you

know, they sort of expect them to do that

whereas Americans don't expect that.

The average American would hear

something from the government or hear the

news on television and assumes that what

they're hearing is the truth unless they're

shown otherwise. They assume that almost

nothing is ever a conspiracy. In Europe it's

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1315

very much the opposite. Anything happens.

They tend to think it's a conspiracy unless

you show them that it wasn't a conspiracy.

I mean, after all, "conspiracy" just

means, you know, more than one person being

involved in something. And if you stop and

think about it, almost everything significant

that happens anywhere involves more than one

person. Yet here there is a -- not a myth

really, but there's just an underlying

assumption that most things are not

conspiracies. And when you have that, it

enables a government which has a propaganda

program, has a disinformation program, to be

relatively successful in -- in having its

disinformation accepted.

The other reason why it -- why it

works even though as we -- as we know,

somewhere there are people who know it's not

true. Somewhere they know you're lying about

something. But another reason it works is

that disinformation is very, very effective

over time. The longer that you, whoever you

are, can control the spin on a story, the

more that spin becomes accepted as the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1316

absolute truth. And in this country the

government has a great deal of power and

influence over that spin.

Q. Why is it so effective over time?

A. Well, this is an area where I had to

consult with other experts because it turns

out really to be a neurological function.

And that was first explained to me by a -- a

professor at Harvard Medical School. And it

has to do with the way the human brain

remembers things, the way we learn things,

the way we create patterns and associations

and reinforce -- well, I don't know how

you -- it sort of like channels in the brain

when certain things trigger certain

collateral thoughts.

And when you associate one thing

with another over time, just the mention of

the one brings the association of the other.

What this will sometimes mean is that even

when something is later exposed as a lie, if

it was accepted as a truth for a long time,

the exposure of it as a lie is not believed.

It's in one ear and out the other.

The best example that we know in my

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1317

field is one that John Stockwell reported

on. He was a CIA officer in Angola -- for

Angola. But they were based -- the CIA

station was based in the Congo. And when the

Cuban troops were sent in to help the

Angolans fight the South Africans during the

early and mid 70's, the CIA's task was to try

to discredit the Cubans and do whatever it

could to make people around the world think

it was a terrible thing that the Cubans were

helping the Angolans.

So Stockwell's group in Congo sat

down, and one guy says to the other guy,

let's think of something terrible to say that

the Cubans did. And another guy says, hey,

why don't we say they're raping Angolan

women. That would be a great thing to say.

The other guy says, terrific. And they call

in their media experts, and they start

sitting there at their desk at the CIA office

and they start typing out these news stories

about how a group of Cuban soldiers raped a

bunch of Angolan women in some operation.

And then they write Story Number 2

which is that the villagers got incensed and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1318

decided they didn't want the Cubans anymore,

and they were going to find the fellows who

did it and arrest them. And in Story Number

3 the villagers captured the Cubans. In

Story Number 4 they were tried by a jury of

the women victims and they were later

executed with their own weapons.

And they made a series of about 12

newspaper stories in a row. And with one

phone call and one visit, it went over the

wire services, it went into Europe, it went

into the United States, it went around the

world. And for about a six-month period

there were all these stories about the

horrible Cuban rapes in Angola. And what

that does is when you hear -- the average

person hears Angola or Cuban, they'll think

rape of the women. And if they hear rape of

the women, they will think Angola or Cubans.

And if you get Angola, they'll think Cubans

and rape of the women.

And these patterns build up so that

that becomes the truth embedded in your

mind. Four years later John Stockwell quit

the CIA and wrote a book exposing it. Wrote

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1319

a big piece for the New York Times about how

the entire Cuban/Angola story was a

fabrication. And he sat there at the desk

typing it. And the day after that story

appeared, there was still 900 million people

around the world who thought the phony story

was true.

Because when year, after year, after

year you hear that something was the case,

one story -- one day saying, hey, the whole

thing was a lie, and it doesn't register on

their brain. It can't beat those -- those

patterns that have been built up.

Q. Let's go back now taking an

example -- let's go back now to the general

area of intelligence because all of this

activity is useless unless there's a

structure into which it fits and into which

it can be put out. Can you deal with the

kind of structure of media operations that

puts out this kind of disinformation. How

extensive is it?

A. Yes. We can be -- we have a lot of

information about the CIA. We have a certain

amount of information about the FBI, a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1320

certain amount about military intelligence.

And the reason for this is because there were

those congressional investigations that I

mentioned before. There have been reports

published, particularly from the Church

Committee in the late 70's, where they

published volume after volume describing the

extent of media operations by the CIA and --

and other agencies.

They -- the exact amounts of money

that were being spent were -- were not

divulged by those initial reports because

that was considered to be classified. The

intelligence budgets are always classified

except at the same time every few weeks

you'll read something in the newspaper where

they say, the classified budget, which is

approximately 25 billion dollars, and so on

and so on and so forth.

So what we -- what we have learned

from these reports is that -- the first thing

was that about a third of the whole CIA

budget went to media propaganda operations.

Q. Well, if a third of the CIA's budget

went to media propaganda operations, how much

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1321

would that be approximately?

A. We're talking about hundreds of

millions of dollars a year just for that. I

mean, the intelligence budget -- now

everything together is according to these --

all these reports that say it's secret, but

it's about 25 to 30 billion dollars a year.

Now, a lot of that is high-tech stuff. It

has nothing to do with what we're talking

about -- satellites and so on. But the stuff

that goes to the CIA is several billion.

And when you factor out overhead and

things like that, you have got your

operational amount. Most of the estimates

suggest that -- that hundreds of billion --

hundreds of millions of dollars -- close to a

billion dollars are being spent every year by

the United States on secret propaganda.

Again, we have fairly good figures

for the CIA because it at least has been

admitted in the past that they did do this

stuff. They admit they do it now except they

say they don't do it within the United

States. But they admit that that's part of

what they do.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1322

The FBI is much harder to -- to get

figures for because they don't generally

admit to conducting media operations. And

unless and until something gets exposed and

they have to admit that particular operation,

they -- they deny to an extent where it's

really hard to try and estimate how much

money is being used by the FBI and by the

military intelligence agencies.

But it's sort of clear that hundreds

of millions of dollars a year are being spent

by various aspects of the government on

deliberately creating and spreading lies.

Q. Before we get into the specifics of

media operations related to the Martin Luther

King case and James Earl Ray, can you give

us -- just to finish the background, can you

give us some idea of the influence that the

CIA and the FBI have had over the media.

A. Yes. Again, this was something that

very specific figures came out in the 70's

and 80's, and we don't know the precise

figures. Today we have no reason to think

that they are significantly less than when

they came out. But when the Church Committee

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1323

reported on the CIA media operations, for

example, beyond friends in the press, beyond

having people who were just generally --

thought along similar lines, it turned out

that they had thousands of journalists in

their employ. Not merely friendly, not

merely agents, not merely someone you could

pass a story to, but people who might have

appeared to the outside world to be a

reporter for CBS was in fact a CIA employee

getting a salary from the CIA.

And that was repeated thousands of

times all around the world. They also owned

outright, the CIA -- about that time 250 or

more media organizations. That's wire

services, newspapers, magazines, radio, TV

stations -- all around the world that they

owned outright. The actual shareholder of

the company turned out to be some CIA front.

The Church Committee, unfortunately,

did not name very many of these organizations

because those that got named, of course, had

to close down immediately. But it was

learned that -- even things like the Rome

Daily American, which was a major English

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1324

language newspaper in Rome, for 20 or 30

years had been owned by the CIA. This was

published and, of course, the paper closed

the next day.

But most people didn't realize

the extent of the intelligence media

organization. It's fairly incredible. They

sort of brag about it. When you read the

books about the history of the CIA, one of

the heroes was the first man in charge of

media operations, a man named Frank Wizner.

And they referred to his organization as the

Mighty Wurlitzer. And there's this image of

this guy sitting at one of those giant

organs, you know, with seventeen keyboards

and you're playing this -- sort of like The

Phantom of the Opera in that scene, and there

was the guy running the CIA media operations

all around the world. And he really was

because every single city of any size on

earth, he had some employee who was --

supposedly worked for a newspaper or a

magazine or a radio station or a wire

service, and they could get stories

anywhere.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1325

Q. Can you give just one or two more

specific examples.

A. Yes. There was one -- actually in an

article that was published written by a

former CIA officer named James Willcot, who

was not in the propaganda division, he was in

finance. But he was so amazed he wrote a

little article about this. And he was

stationed in Japan one time when there was a

big debate raging there over whether nuclear

power ships should be able to dock in

Japanese ports. It's been a very touchy

issue -- at least since Hiroshima it's been a

very touchy issue in Japan -- even peaceful

uses of nuclear power.

And the U.S. line was to promote the

docking of nuclear power ships because the

U.S. had more and more of them. So they

wanted the Japanese papers to editorialize in

favor of this in the debate that was going

on.

And Jim said he looked and he saw

this guy at a nearby desk sit down and

type -- this is a CIA officer, an employee of

the U.S. Government -- type an editorial and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1326

then wave goodbye to everybody, left the

office. The next morning that appeared as

the editorial -- the lead editorial in the

largest newspaper in Japan. Now, that

level -- they didn't go to a friendly

publisher and say, gee, we would sort of like

it if you could maybe do something a little

bit favorable to this issue. They wrote the

editorial, they handed it to the guy. And

the next day in Japanese it appears in the

paper.

Another thing showing the influence

here in this country was during the Vietnam

War. I don't know if -- well, some people

might. People my age will remember it.

There was -- Life magazine that had a cover

picture of a North Vietnamese stamp that

showed the Vietnamese shooting down American

planes. And it showed U.S. planes with U.S.

markings being burst into flames and crashing

and U.S. pilots being killed.

And it was a pretty bizarre and

gruesome set of postage stamps. And there

was a whole story in there basically trying

to give the line that the Vietnamese were

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1327

glorifying the killing of Americans. And

they thought it was so great to kill

Americans that they were putting it on their

postage stamps. The only thing that was

later learned is that these were not North

Vietnamese stamps. They were CIA forgeries.

Had never been real stamps. And the CIA was

able to have them appear on the cover of Life

magazine as if they were the real thing.

That level of influence is something

that many people don't realize. And when you

read the congressional reports, page after

page after page, it's absolutely astonishing

how, given the urgency and given that they

have hundreds of millions of dollars at their

command, they could get almost anything to

appear almost anywhere.

Q. What about the FBI and domestic

propaganda?

A. Well, the FBI, there's much less

documentation, again, because the official

position is that the FBI doesn't do this.

Whereas the official position is the CIA does

do it although they tried not to talk about

it. But what did come out in the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1328

congressional reports primarily is that a

major FBI division that was called the crime

reporting division was theoretically supposed

to keep track of how federal crimes were

being reported. Why that was their business,

I don't know. But that's what its theory

was.

But in fact what it was doing was a

whole division set up to keep track of

journalists and reporters and magazines and

newspapers to decide who could be counted on

to write stories that the FBI wanted written,

who would slant stories the way they wanted

it.

The question of whether these

particular reporters were actually FBI

employees, like so many were CIA employees,

is unclear. That's never been admitted by

the government that the FBI actually took its

own employees and had them get a job as a

correspondent on the newspaper, whereas we

know the CIA did that in many, many places.

There's no reason to think they couldn't have

done it other than the fact that it hasn't

yet been -- been exposed.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1329

But in any event, there were

significant pressures available to the FBI

to -- to use their friends. And the Church

Committee report gives -- gives many, many

examples -- copies of memos from Hoover on

down where there would be a thing attached

and say, get this information to our friends

at the Copely News Service, get this

information to our friends at Reader's

Digest, get this to our friendly AP reporter

and so on.

And then, of course, they would show

the clipping indicating that in fact someone

had gotten it to their friends, and it would

then go over the wires or appear in stories.

Q. Let's turn now to the use of the

media in this type of campaign against Martin

Luther King, Jr. But before you do that,

could you tell the Court and the Jury, what

are the sources of -- underlying your

testimony -- this aspect of it.

A. Yes. I did a goodly amount of

additional research and preparation and

contemplation of appearing here. And there

really are two main sources. The first, of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1330

course, is the various congressional reports

that we have talked about. In addition to

reports about the general operations or

misconduct of the CIA or the FBI, there have

been specific studies -- I don't know if they

have been mentioned in this case, but there

have been specific studies relating to Martin

Luther King, Jr., both with respect to

attacks on him while he was alive and also

specific reports with respect to his murder.

There was an entire volume published

from one of the Senate investigations on the

FBI media campaign against Dr. King. And

there was a House Committee that published a

volume investigating his assassination. And

these, of course, are the -- the most

important sources for what I'm talking about

and what other people have written about

because they have a great deal of government

documentation in them which no private

journalist could ever get their hands on.

There are things in there that even

the best of research wouldn't be able to

obtain. But the congressional committees had

subpoena powers and were able to amass

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1331

thousands of documents, most of which were

photocopied and attached to their reports.

Q. For our purposes here, as well as

those sources, what other sources have you

used?

A. Well, I've also, of course, reviewed

many books that have been written on the

subject -- hundreds of articles. And I've --

I've done briefcases full of clippings that

were major stories written about Dr. King,

particularly in the last few years of his

life. And then the -- most of the coverage

in the first few years of the James Earl Ray

case. Both before and after his guilty plea

there was intensive coverage, as you can

imagine.

And throughout the 60's and into the

early 70's, there was quite a bit of

coverage, and those clippings that I've been

able to find I've reviewed. Some of the

sporadic coverage in the 80's and 90's I've

also been able to assemble and review,

although the level of that coverage

has decreased very much over the last decade

or so.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1332

Q. What do the congressional reports --

if you can summarize them, give some

instances, what do the congressional reports

tell us about the FBI's use of the media in

general but then particularly as it relates

to Dr. King?

A. Well, in general, the first thing

they show is that throughout its history, the

FBI has made relations with the media a key

area. Not so much infiltrating employees as

the CIA did, but cultivating very, very deep

connections throughout the American media.

They had the entire division of the FBI --

the crime reporting division was dealing

solely with developing friendly journalists,

developing ways in which you could get what

you wanted to appear in the papers to be

there and what you didn't want not to be

there on a level that was -- nobody realized

until these -- these reports came out.

The crime reporting division was

keeping track of virtually every journalist

in America that wrote anything that had to do

with the FBI. And whether everything was

being classified as friendly or unfriendly,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1333

it -- of course, it was somewhat complicated

because it generally meant: Did J. Edgar

Hoover like what they wrote or not like what

they wrote? And practically -- the opinion

of nobody else at the FBI mattered while

Hoover was alive.

But he kept charts on every

significant journalist as to who was

helpful. And when you look through the

reports and the documents that have come out,

you will see statements by Hoover and his

immediate subordinates get this information

to friendly journalists. Get this to our

friend at U.S. News and World Report. Get

this to some friendly reporters in Memphis.

And you just see all that sort of stuff.

Interestingly though, this

information -- it never mattered whether the

information was true or false. That was not

what it was about. You find FBI planting

information that's true, you find them

planting information that's false. The

critical thing was if they had the friend at

that media place, that friend was going to

run what they wanted without investigating

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1334

it.

Q. Could you just cut through -- tell us

what the Church Committee said about

CoIntellPro reports and explain to the Court

and the Jury what were the CoIntellPro

activities.

A. CoIntellPro was Counter Intelligence

Program, and that was the -- the major FBI

program to counter what it conceived to be

threats to American democracy. And it

was, at least in my opinion, rather paranoid

in what it considered threats. It had

divisions trying to operate against

communists, against socialists, against the

New Left, against the Old Left, against what

they referred to as Black Nationalists, what

they referred to as hate groups.

They had a separate section just on

the Nation of Islam. They had a separate

section on the Civil Rights Movement. They

had a hybrid program on CommInfil which was

to deal with the possibility that communists

were infiltrating non-communist groups.

So they had one section trying to

disrupt groups they felt were communist

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1335

influence or dangerous, and another one

trying to infiltrate groups or find out about

groups that they thought other people were

infiltrating.

Basically they -- and, of course,

you have to understand, "counter intelligence

program" was really a misnomer. Because

counter intelligence normally means you're

trying to find things out. Counter

intelligence officers in war time and in

espionage are supposed to be finding out

information. But these were active

committees, not passive. And what counter

intelligence programs were, were overt

attempts -- sometimes very, very complicated

operations to disrupt organizations which

they felt were a threat regardless of whether

the organizations were committing any

crimes.

I mean, the irony of this is that

while the FBI theoretically was supposed to

limit itself to investigating crimes, and

federal crimes at that, it basically took the

position that, you know, thinking bad

thoughts was a crime. Or if you didn't like

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1336

the current government of that day, that was

a crime. And if J. Edgar Hoover decided the

group should be disrupted, then CoIntellPro

would sit down and figure out how to disrupt

it.

Q. Where was Dr. King in this

constellation? Where did they -- how did

they regard him? How was he targeted?

A. Well, he was just about the top of

the list in terms of J. Edgar Hoover for

reasons that are still unclear. Many books

have been written about J. Edgar Hoover, and

I don't think anybody quite understands what

made him tick. He hated Dr. King. He made

no bones about it. I mean, he would -- he

would send letters using -- referring to him

as garbage, referring to him as slime.

When Martin Luther King was awarded

the Nobel Peace Prize, he wrote a long

diatribe about how that was the most

ridiculous thing he ever heard of in his

life, and in fact started a whole thing to

disrupt the Nobel Peace Prize program. But

he and the SCLC, as Dr. King's organization,

were by themselves a major target of the FBI

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1337

from early on. He certainly was being

investigated in the 50's. It wasn't until

the early 60's that it really intensified.

But Hoover was much more public

about Dr. King than almost any other

individual. He would be public about "the

communists" or "the terrorists" or whatever.

But Martin Luther King he specifically

used -- used the most horrendous language to

describe him. And once went on a -- the only

time he ever gave a press interview called

him -- called Martin Luther King the most

notorious liar in the history of the United

States.

Q. Okay.

A. And he was saying that because King

had had the temerity to say that the FBI

agents in the south weren't being terribly

helpful to blacks who were having problems

with the racism there.

Q. Can you give an example of some of

the media operations that the FBI and Hoover

mounted against Dr. King's organization.

A. Sure. The first really significant

ones were -- were to -- to suggest that the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1338

Southern Christian Leadership Conference was

communist infiltrated and communist

dominated. They -- the FBI had prepared

dossiers on King and on everybody who was

working with him and had two people who were

close to Dr. King who had at some time in the

past had some affiliations with communists.

You should understand, because this

came out later, they had no evidence

whatsoever that either of these two people

was at that time a communists or that either

of these two people was trying to impose some

communist line on Dr. King, but they decided

to say that anyway.

And they prepared dossiers on these

two -- one was a white lawyer, Stanley

Levinson, the other was a black organizer

named Jack O'Dell. And what they did is

they -- the same way, get us a friend at this

paper, get us a friend there. They started

planting stories. And I think I've --

Q. Let me -- let me --

A. -- given you one of the key ones.

Q. Yes, let's pull up on the stand one

of the stories -- screen one of the stories

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1339

that they planted.

A. That's the second page. I think the

headline is -- right. This was a major story

about -- about Jack O'Dell and an attempt

to -- I mean, they were attempting to

discredit Dr. King and the organization.

They were not -- they were not trying to just

get rid of O'Dell because that would be

better for the organization. But they spread

this -- this particular clipping, I believe,

is from The Atlanta Constitution. But it

says in it that -- it makes reference to

prior articles in the St. Louis Globe

Democrat, in the New Orleans Times

Picayune. The story which was essentially

based on the FBI spreading this -- this

information appeared all over the country.

Q. Other than a general attack, is there

anything -- anything else significant about

this -- this article?

A. Well, actually, this is a good one

because it demonstrates some of the

techniques they used. The most significant

one is being fuzzy whenever you can. It

has -- in there it talks -- it refers to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1340

O'Dell and says: "Has been identified as a

member of the National Committee of the

Communist Party."

And that -- this is sort of the

passive tense to avoid saying what -- what

you know. When you say someone has been --

you don't say who identified him. You don't

even say whether this identification has been

confirmed. You don't say whether it's true

or false. I mean, you know, one person

anywhere can say something about anybody, and

then you say he has been identified as a such

and such.

That's very important, particularly

because we -- that's in the present tense.

It says: "Has been identified as a member of

the communist party." We know now that at

the time, when the FBI gave this information

to its friend, they knew that was untrue.

Because they knew -- whatever might have been

ten years before, they knew at that time that

he was not a member of the Communist Party

and yet they sent out this information saying

he has been identified as a member of the

Communist Party.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1341

Q. Was this a part of a broader effort

on the part of the FBI to discredit the Black

Movement and to tie the Civil Rights Movement

to communists generally and communist

infiltration?

A. Very much so. It was one of the --

the few instances where -- where Hoover

actually testified before Congress and

allowed the testimony to be public. He --

the line was that the -- the Black

Movement -- the Civil Rights Movement was

being exploited by communists. And this

particular clipping is another example --

again, this is from the New York Times -- of

this program. These are all -- despite the

fact that many of them have bylines, although

this one does not have a byline, these are

all based on material packets -- press

packets almost that were prepared by the FBI

and given to their -- to their friends in

these -- in these stories.

And in this case, it's even more

significant because this was part of a

campaign that was so organized that Hoover

got his friends to write stories about it

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1342

before his testimony became public so that

when the testimony then became public, as it

did for this one, people would know about

it. One of his very, very close friends was

Stewart -- Joseph Alsop, who was a syndicated

national columnist back then. And this was

Alsop's column about the terribly sad fact

that the Civil Rights Movement in America was

totally being run by the communists.

This, again, was based on whatever

the FBI handed him and asked him to publish.

This was just one week before the other story

where the -- where the testimony became

public.

Q. There was an escalating battle

between Hoover's FBI and Martin Luther King's

SCLC and the Civil Rights and then anti-war

activities. What -- how did it intensify

from the standpoint of media operations

against Dr. King?

A. Well, the first real escalation was

in sixty -- in late '64 when I mentioned

before that Hoover gave a press conference

and called King the most notorious liar in

the country. This was sort of a -- it was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1343

shocking that he said it, it was shocking

that he said it in the context of a public

meeting with journalists. And it appeared

all over the country. And the whole

conference was reprinted in U.S. News and

World Report with a short response from --

from Dr. King.

That was the start of -- of a

campaign which continued right up until --

until King's death. I mentioned before that

during the Nobel Peace Prize period of time

this was in -- the nomination was in late

'64, and he received it in January of '65.

Hoover had the FBI do everything they could

to minimize -- he couldn't stop the Swedish

and Norwegian governments from giving him the

prize. But he did everything that he could

to try to stop it from being honored here.

There was a major banquet in

Dr. King's honor in Atlanta when he came back

from receiving the prize. Hoover got the

editor of the Atlanta Constitution personally

to go around and try and persuade various

people not to attend the banquet. There were

also a series of articles around this time

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1344

trying to show that -- that King was being

influenced by communists which were being --

again, we learned this from reports.

The FBI, as the CIA, was actually

writing the articles anonymously and then

trying to get their friends in papers to

print the article under somebody else's

name. And there were a whole series, some of

which actually did get printed, some of which

didn't. There were also -- I won't go -- I

mean, there are big -- hundreds and hundreds

of pages of reports detailing all the things

that the FBI did.

They -- one of the most outrageous

was a doctored tape recording that was

prepared that purported to -- to be a

recording of Dr. King engaging in raucous and

possibly sexual activities with various

people. It turned out to be -- most of it

was totally fraudulent. And what wasn't

fraudulent did not have to do with anything

torrid going on. It was all put together.

And the tape -- in fact, the tape was

originally used -- and this is one of the

things that the House Committee found the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1345

most outrageous -- in an attempt to try and

drive Dr. King to commit suicide.

Shortly before he went to get the

Nobel Prize, the tape was mailed to him with

a long letter basically saying, if you don't

kill yourself, we're going to make this

public. Nothing ever happened because he was

getting so much mail that this thing that

somebody thought was -- somebody made a tape

of one of his speeches. And they put it in

the back room, and they didn't get to look at

it until about nine months later, long after

he had come back.

And then they saw the note trying to

get him to commit suicide. And then, ten

years later, we discover that it was the FBI

who wrote that note and made that tape and

mailed it to Dr. King.

THE COURT: Let's take a few

seconds and stretch.

(Brief break taken.)

THE COURT: Bring in the Jury.

(Jury In.)

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Mr. Schaap, you've

described an awesome power that exists in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1346

government influenced and controlled,

sometimes owned, media -- print, audio,

visual media entities -- and how that

infrastructure gets focused on opponents of

the United States such as Martin Luther

King.

Do you see how this incredible power

was brought against Dr. King and intensified

against him during the last year of his life?

A. Yes. I think the -- the main reason

for that was very, very specific. There was

one speech that Dr. King gave in April of

1967 at Riverside Church in New York City

where he came out against the war in

Vietnam. And if you remember back to that

period of time, this was a fundamental debate

gripping every aspect of this country, the

pros and cons of the involvement in Vietnam.

And when Dr. King came out against

the U.S. involvement there, this was

immediately accepted by J. Edgar Hoover as

proof that he was a communist, proof that he

was a terrible person.

Q. But didn't this have the effect of

unifying all the forces -- all of the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1347

intelligence forces of the United States, and

so now just -- it was not just an FBI matter,

but it -- it seemed to spread to military

intelligence, central intelligence and other

areas too, didn't it?

A. Absolutely. Once Dr. King made that

statement, the CIA in particular considered

him and his movement fair game. Even to the

extent that their operations were limited to

foreign policy, the -- again, because of the

congressional investigations, we know that

the CIA, which people thought did not operate

domestically within the U.S., had a huge

domestic program called Operation Chaos which

was designed to counter opposition to the

Vietnam War.

And even though they later admitted

it was illegal and later admitted they

shouldn't have been doing it, there have been

whole books of congressional reports about

all the Operation Chaos activity in the

United States, and what they called Black

Nationalists were a specific target of

that -- that campaign.

Q. Did this continue into 1968 in his

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1348

activities with the Sanitation Workers'

Strike in Memphis and planning for the Poor

People's Campaign in Washington?

A. Absolutely. The campaign against

Dr. King's activities went up to the very

last day of his life. In particular, on

the -- his involvement with the strike in

Memphis, the FBI decided at that point to try

to spread stories that he was encouraging

violence. One of the -- the key articles was

in the Christian Science Monitor at the end

of March of '68 and, again, gives all of

the -- the themes that the FBI wanted --

wanted planted, particularly about violence.

The article uses bizarre language

for something about a small strike in a

medium-sized town that, you know, was

something but was not like an earth-shaking

event. This was the Sanitation Workers'

Strike. And this story refers to it as a

potentially cataclysmic racial

confrontation. Not quite World War III, but

along that kind of language.

And stories that began to appear --

and this was just before Dr. King was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1349

killed -- were -- were suggesting that he was

closely allied with violent forces.

Q. Mr. Schaap, this Court and Jury has

heard testimony from a former New York Times

reporter who was told by his national

editor -- Times reporters in this courtroom

notwithstanding -- told by his national

editor, Claude Sitton, to go to Memphis and

nail Dr. King. Those were the words Earl

Caldwell used in his testimony here. Is that

the kind of thing you're talking about?

A. Oh, absolutely. Hoover was -- you

see from the memos in the report -- and Lord

knows what we don't know and haven't seen --

was sending people out everywhere to talk to

all of their friendly media contacts to get

King. And they would usually deliver packets

of information, much of it false, to be used

as part of the -- of the campaign. They also

were -- used a lot of interesting tactics.

And you see in these stories a lot

of fuzzy -- I mean, the story that's on the

screen, for example, has a sentence in it

near the end where it says: "Many blacks

have mixed feelings about Dr. King." I mean,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1350

this is a -- they teach you in Journalism 101

not to use sentences like that. What does it

mean "many blacks"? Many -- everybody had

mixed feelings about everything. If you want

to do it, you say who has what feelings.

But the whole thing was to try to

say he's violent, he's hanging around with

violent people, and basically the blacks in

this country shouldn't support him.

Q. What was this operation like -- this

media blitz, this media disinformation

campaign? What was it like after Dr. King

was killed?

A. Well, for one thing, the attempts to

discredit Dr. King -- particularly the FBI

attempts -- did not stop after his death.

They continued to send out their little

dossiers and reports and phony information to

try and discredit his memory. They also --

in the beginning when, of course, the

assassin had not yet been caught or, rather,

no one yet had been caught and charged with

the assassination, had to give the impression

that the FBI was doing a great job.

I mean, one of the criticisms that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1351

was unavoidable is when Hoover had already

publicly attacked Dr. King in all these

magazines and said he thought he was a liar

and thought he was the worst problem facing

the United States and so on, it became a

problem for the FBI then to try and convince

America that they were doing everything in

their power to apprehend his killer. And to

do that, they had to pull out all the stops

and get all their friendly columnists writing

story after story that they were doing

everything they could. And also subsequently

to try and add to the stories that they were

convinced that James Earl Ray was the lone

assassin.

Q. Let me put up this article. This

story relates to a Jack Anderson column.

A. Yes. This is interesting for what it

reveals later. This was a story that came

out in 1975. That's actually an interesting

example of Jack Anderson criticizing a group

of people, of whom he fails to mention he was

one at the time. It's something that happens

often when columnists decide to clear the --

clear the slate.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1352

But he was reporting at this time

about how the FBI had waged the campaign

against Dr. King, how he knew about it, how

he knew about all these gross accusations

that were being -- being handed out. It's --

I mean, the story is only interesting because

why didn't he say it at the time is one's

first thought. But at least he stayed

abreast of some of it. He also was able

to -- to explain that a number of rumors

about Dr. King had been proven to be not

true. What he didn't know at the time

because the Congressional Report came out a

little bit later -- what he didn't know is

that even the FBI at the time they were

spreading the stories when Dr. King was alive

knew that the stories were not true.

Q. Now, at the same time they were

trying to discredit Dr. King and continued to

discredit his name after he was killed, they

were trying to enhance the -- the manhunt and

the law enforcement work during that time.

A. Yes. Not only enhance, but use

hyperbole that was pretty bizarre. Although,

of course, you can understand the pressures

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1353

that were on them when no one had been

caught. Drew Pearson, who was a very close

friend of Hoover's, had a nationally

syndicated column and wrote one basically

designed to try and kill the rumors that

Hoover wasn't trying hard because he didn't

like King.

And in it Pearson says he is

convinced that the FBI is conducting perhaps

the most painstaking exhaustive manhunt ever

before undertaken in the United States.

Why -- how he would know is beyond

us, but that's clearly what Hoover told him

to say. They also -- I don't have the

clipping here. But they also had another one

of their very close operatives, Jeremiah

O'Leary, who was then with the Washington

Star, did an article for the Reader's

Digest. And he went one beyond Pearson and

said it was the greatest manhunt in law

enforcement history in the world. So he was

now saying this wasn't only the greatest

manhunt in America, it was the greatest

manhunt ever, anywhere.

There were -- there are a whole --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1354

and, of course, when Ray was arrested, then

there was a state of sort of self-

congratulatory columns done by the same

friends of the FBI showing what a wonderful

job they had done.

Q. Are there any other aspects of this

coverage after Dr. King's death that were

clearly media operations?

A. Well, there certainly are in my

opinion. At this point, once we get beyond

the things that have been admitted in the

Congressional Reports, I'm drawing my

conclusions based on my own experience and

expertise. But it certainly seems clear that

there were media operations around -- not

only that the FBI had done a wonderful job,

but also on the -- the campaign to

demonstrate that -- not only that James Earl

Ray had done it, but that he had acted alone.

Q. What are the possible operations that

you actually see?

A. Well, there -- you see in stories,

again by friends of the FBI, statements

like: It looks like the theory that there

was a conspiracy is untrue. The FBI has

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1355

exploded the theory that there was a

conspiracy. The -- even people who had --

see, they -- they got caught a little bit

because in the beginning they were planting

stories that had conspiracy -- I mean, there

was a story that the FBI planted at the very

beginning saying that Dr. King had been

killed by the husband -- by an irate husband

of a lover of his.

Now, later -- ten years later we saw

that this was invented and that they had made

up this story. But then they were sort of

stuck. Because if you're saying that Ray was

hired by somebody else to do it, that's a

conspiracy. So then they had to drop that

story because now the line was there was no

conspiracy. Now they're saying -- and the

same people. Pearson mentioned that story

and then later on denounced the generally

prevalent theory that the murder involved a

conspiracy without pointing out that he was

one of the people who were part of the

original prevalent theory.

Even -- particularly, actually,

after the guilty plea, when it got -- there

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1356

was no longer a judicial proceeding going on

about which they could feed the stories they

wanted to, they still felt a compulsion to

periodically come up with stories that there

was no conspiracy, there was no plot. This

one on the screen being another one of

these -- these examples.

Q. This is the continuation of the lone

killer, lone nut gunman that was -- had to be

perpetuated throughout the period of James

Earl Ray's incarceration?

A. Absolutely. It never -- because Ray

insisted virtually from the day of the plea

that there was a conspiracy, they felt

compelled to -- to continue to plant these --

these stories. They -- they went on for a

number of years at a very intense level, and

then it sort of petered off.

But in the first year after the plea

of guilty, Anderson wrote a number of columns

saying there just wasn't any conspiracy. Max

Lerner wrote columns saying Ray was the

killer, there's nothing to the conspiracy

theory. And when -- another example of how

they -- they fuzzied it was even at the time

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1357

of the plea, there was a story on the -- in

the Washington Post, which I think I've given

you a copy of, where they said: No evidence

of any plot, Jury is told.

Now that isn't really what the Jury

was told. But if you read the story, it was

that the prosecution was not presenting any

evidence of a plot, which is very different

from saying -- of course, they didn't present

any evidence that there wasn't a plot

either. Yet if you look at that headline, it

looks like something has been said and done

in court showing a jury there was no -- no

plot. And that's not what happened. It

wasn't -- it wasn't discussed either way.

And they -- they -- there was a

story I believe the next week in the

Washington Post where the title of the story

was: "Ray Alone Still Talks of a Plot."

Which, again, journalistically was

ridiculous. Because there were millions upon

millions of Americans talking about whether

there was a plot. And a story which, you

know, tries to create the impression that

James Earl Ray was stark raving mad and was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1358

the only person in America who thought there

might have been a plot.

That campaign went -- and, in fact,

they then said, well, what we really meant

was that he's the only person who is

officially involved in the proceedings and

thinks there's a plot, everyone else

doesn't. And even that wasn't true because

the next day there was a story in the papers

that the -- the judge here -- the judge at

the time, Judge Battle, wasn't sure and

thought maybe there had been a plot and

certainly made it clear that under Tennessee

law if further -- if co-conspirators came up

or were arrested or indicted, they would be

subject to -- to trial.

Q. Let me pass this article to you and

ask you to look at that, Mr. Schaap. That's

an article that appeared in the New York

Times, Column 1 on the 17th of November,

1978, right at the time when the -- both Ray

bothers were being questioned and examined in

public before the House Select Committee on

Assassination. And that article speaks of an

independent investigation by the New York

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1359

Times and the FBI and the Select Committee,

into an Alton, Illinois, bank robbery -- an

investigation which never took place because

it's now been established.

Is that an example of the type of

disinformation that one finds in an attempt

to train the public minds?

A. Oh, absolutely. Given the fact that

subsequently it was shown that they were not

suspects in that robbery, it -- the first

thing it means is that the -- the reporter is

saying some things which had to have been

simply fed to him and not checked. Because

if you're saying something happened, which in

fact very, very basic journalism would have

proven didn't happen, you are either doing it

on your own to spread some disinformation,

which is extremely unlikely, or you're being

asked to put a spin on something that you

know is going to -- to be coming out.

The -- again, I'm -- I don't know

what happened in Alton, Illinois. But if, as

I understand there's been testimony, it is

clear that the Ray brothers were not suspects

in that case, this story is clearly

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1360

disinformation because it's designed to make

it appear not only that they were suspects in

that case but that they did it, and to make

it appear that two investigations confirmed

that whereas, since we know it wasn't true,

it's impossible that either investigation

could have confirmed it.

Q. Let me ask you finally -- this has

been a long road -- how you regard -- what is

your explanation for the fact that there has

been such little national media coverage of

these -- of this trial and this evidence and

this event here in this Memphis courtroom,

which is the first trial ever to be able to

produce evidence on this assassination --

what has happened here that Mighty Wurlitzer

is not sounding but is in fact totally

silent -- almost totally silent?

A. Oh, but -- as we know, silence can be

deafening. Disinformation is not only

getting certain things to appear in print,

it's also getting certain things not to

appear in print. I mean, the first -- the

first thing I would say as a way of

explanation is the incredibly powerful effect

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1361

of disinformation over a long period of time

that I mentioned before. For 30 years the

official line has been that James Earl Ray

killed Martin Luther King and he did it all

by himself. That's 30 years, not -- nothing

like the short period when the line was that

the Cubans raped the Angolan women. But for

30 years it's James Earl Ray killed Dr. King,

did it all by himself.

And when that is imprinted in the

minds of the general public for 30 years, if

somebody stood up and confessed and said: I

did it. Ray didn't do it, I did it. Here's

a movie. Here's a video showing me do it. 99

percent of the people wouldn't believe him

because it just -- it just wouldn't click in

the mind. It would just go right to -- it

couldn't be. It's just a powerful

psychological effect over 30 years of

disinformation that's been imprinted on the

brains of the -- the public. Something to

the country couldn't -- couldn't be.

Q. Not only -- excuse me. Not only

psychological, but weren't you also saying

neurological?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1362

A. Yes. I'm not a doctor. But what I

understood is that these -- the brain's

patterns of thinking are a physical aspect of

the human brain. That's how we develop

patterns of thought, how we develop

associations.

And then, of course, the Mighty

Wurlitzer we talked about is still there,

it's still playing its tune. And even though

you might think 30 years is a long time, that

almost everybody who might get in trouble is

probably dead by now, that's -- that's how it

works. People obtain influence, people make

vast sums of money through this propaganda.

Those people pass that influence on to

others, they pass the money down the line,

and all of that can be at risk for a very,

very long time.

There are documents from the

investigation of the assassination of Abraham

Lincoln that are still classified. Don't ask

me why, but they were originally sealed for

100 years. And then in 1965 President Linden

Johnson said, well, it's so close to the

Kennedy assassination, if people read the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1363

Lincoln documents, it might make them think

funny things about Kennedy, so he classified

them for another 50 years. So now the grand

children of anybody around Lincoln was around

are long dead, and these documents are

still -- still classified. And we're talking

today about a case that's 100 years more

immediate than Lincoln. And the

establishment is still the establishment.

Q. Mr. Schaap, thank you very much for

joining us this afternoon.

A. Thank you.

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further,

Your Honor.

THE COURT: Just a moment.

Mr. Garrison?

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, I

have no questions of this witness.

THE COURT: You have nothing.

Very well. Sir, you may stand down. Thank

you very much.

THE WITNESS: Thank you, Your

Honor.

(Witness excused.)

(Court adjourned until

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1364

December 1, 1999, at 10:00 a.m.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1365

THE CIRCUIT COURT OF SHELBY COUNTY, TENNESSEE

THIRTIETH JUDICIAL DISTRICT AT MEMPHIS

_____________________________________________

CORETTA SCOTT KING, MARTIN

LUTHER KING, III, BERNICE KING,

DEXTER SCOTT KING and YOLANDA KING,

Plaintiffs,

Vs. Case No. 97242-4 T.D.

LOYD JOWERS and OTHER UNKNOWN

CO-CONSPIRATORS,

Defendants.

_____________________________________________

PROCEEDINGS

December 1, 1999

VOLUME X

_______________________________________________

Before the Honorable James E. Swearengen,

Division 4, Judge presiding.

_______________________________________________

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI,

RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

COURT REPORTERS

Suite 2200, One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

(901) 529-1999

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1366

- APPEARANCES -

For the Plaintiffs:

MR. WILLIAM PEPPER

Attorney at Law

575 Madison Avenue, Suite 1006

New York, New York 10022

(212) 605-0515

For the Defendant:

MR. LEWIS K. GARRISON, Sr.

MR. JOHN H. BLEDSOE

Attorneys at Law

100 North Main Street, Suite 1025

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

(901) 527-6445

For the Attorney General:

MR. MICHAEL MYERS

Assistant Attorney General

425 Fifth Avenue North

Nashville, Tennessee 37243

(615) 741-3491

Reported by:

MS. MARGIE J. ROUTHEAUX

Registered Professional Reporter

Daniel, Dillinger, Dominski,

Richberger & Weatherford

2200 One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1367

- INDEX -

WITNESS: PAGE NUMBER

MARK GLANKLER

Direct Examination

By Mr. Garrison --------------- 1448

Cross-Examination

By Mr. Pepper ----------------- 1461

Redirect Examination

By Mr. Garrison --------------- 1468

DEXTER KING

Direct Examination

By Mr. Pepper ----------------- 1476

Cross-Examination

By Mr. Garrison --------------- 1532

Redirect Examination

By Mr. Pepper ----------------- 1541

Recross-Examination

By Mr. Garrison --------------- 1542

TRIAL EXHIBITS

30 --------------- 1385 (Collective)

31 --------------- 1508

32 --------------- 1511

33 --------------- 1539

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1368

P R O C E E D I N G S

(December 1st, 1999, 9:55 a.m.)

MR. MYERS: ... work product and

certain other items involving confidential

informants and the like can be removed and

held from the public. Because records have

been released does not necessarily constitute

a waiver of work product -- the work product

privilege. That doesn't mean that Judge

Beasley or Judge Duire's thought processes

were in there. Neither side has come forward

and said, here are papers from Judge Beasley

and Judge Duire. Here is their stuff on

thought processes, mental impressions,

beliefs, legal theories of the case.

None of that has been shown or

identified as having been produced. And to

somehow say something has been waived,

without coming in and being specific as to

what it is that has been waived, is not

valid. I mean, ordinarily if one is going to

show a waiver of any privilege, one has got

to be fairly specific concerning what it is

that's been given up. Yet neither side here

has come in and identified that.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1369

There's been discussions about

wanting to talk to an investigator who

apparently has been talking to people for

several years. This case has been pending

for a while. The way the Court systems work,

a case doesn't get filed on day one and tried

on day two.

And under the discovery rules, which

would govern this case, the Rules of Civil

Procedure, starting with Rule 26 going

through Rule 37, there could have been

attempts made to discover this stuff before

coming to trial. If all these serious

allegations were out there to be raised, why

weren't depositions taken before this time?

Why weren't subpoenas put out for

depositions? Why weren't records inspected,

people called in? In the normal course of a

civil action, this is what happens.

And if these people were so

important and so critical to the case, and

that this is literally pay money or not, why

wasn't an attempt made before this time --

before now to call these witnesses into

court? One would expect that a lawyer

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1370

doesn't want to put somebody on the stand

without knowing what he's going to say.

That's playing Russian roulette with one's

malpractice policy a lot of times.

Supposedly, Judges Duire and Beasley

are supposed to have made false statements,

and this has supposedly been known a while.

Why weren't they questioned before this

time? The statute that provides the

exemption of testimony from trial does allow

depositions in certain cases. That could

have been done. It hasn't. These files have

been open to anybody. So to determine

whether Mr. Jowers had any involvement in the

murder of Dr. King, and if this is a public

report, then this public report may have

identified witnesses, may have identified

evidence. Why haven't these people been

sought out, questioned and brought in?

Under Rule 602 those would be the

people who are competent to testify in this

Court rather than bringing in prosecutors who

handled the case 30 years ago. There's been

talk about missing items of evidence. Not

conceding that's true or not. How would

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1371

Judge Beasley and Judge Duire know about

that?

The case happened 30 years ago.

There's been no -- no evidence or suggestion

that any of these files have been in their

exclusive control or custody over this time.

And, in fact, in all likelihood, they became

just records within the District Attorney

General's office. And given the historical

significance of the facts involved, it would

not be surprising if many people haven't

rummaged through those files. Certainly they

would be of interest to academic historians.

They would be of interest perhaps to other

authors or members of the public who wanted

to know something that happened.

What it sounds like is going on is a

case that rather than calling these people

and checking it out and sifting through the

evidence, let's try to bring the lawyers in

and get them to do -- or an investigator and

get them to do our homework for us. And,

again, that gets right back to work product.

Lawyers are not required to do somebody

else's trial prep, are not required to do

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1372

somebody else's civil discovery.

And the law generally protects it

except in those extraordinary circumstances

where the exclusive control rests perhaps

within the lawyer's hands, and then it goes

only to factual material. For all these

reasons we would ask the Court, again, to

quash the subpoena.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, can I

just reply briefly to that?

THE COURT: Yes, sir.

MR. GARRISON: If Your Honor

please, first of all, when the Attorney

General says that we didn't take an

initiative stand for Mr. Glankler -- take

depositions, they have filed a report --

about a 50, 75-page report to indicate all

the things that he did in the investigation.

I have seen reports. It's a matter of public

record.

So, I mean, I knew what he said.

I've talked to him personally more than

once. He has told me about my client calling

and he recorded a statement and so on and so

forth. So, I mean, I don't know what I can

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1373

gain by a deposition. He's publicly made

statements about this.

Now, as far as Judge Beasley and

Judge Duire, if Your Honor please, they have

been on television the last 15 months making

statements about this case. Strange that

they got on television, they have given press

conferences to the press here in Memphis.

It's strange they get on television and tell

the whole world about what they know about

this case but they can't come in here and

tell 12 people. And their testimony, if the

Court please, I think is absolutely essential

to the defense of this case. As far as

Mr. Jowers is concerned, it's a very serious

case, a historical matter.

And, if Your Honor please, if Your

Honor's discretion will permit you to require

them to come in -- I have two or three

questions I want to ask them. And Mr. Myers

can object to it if I ask them anything that

he feels is not pertinent. But I think that

in view of the public policy in this case, in

view the historical nature of this case, the

importance of it, that they should be

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1374

required to come in and testify, and

certainly Mr. Glankler. There's no exemption

under any law that I can think of.

THE COURT: In checking the

statute, 24-9-101, the Court doesn't find any

provision that would automatically exclude

these parties. One of the most sacred rights

in our judicial system is that right to

subpoena witnesses on one's behalf.

Now, it's said that these parties --

it's anticipated that certain questions may

be asked of these witnesses which would be

improper. If that is so, the time to react

to that would be at the time that the

question is asked. At that point the Court

would determine the relevance or the

admissibility of the answer they gave.

It's also suggested that there were

opportunities before the trial to discover or

to take advantage of certain information.

All of you as lawyers know that during the

course of a trial issues arise, and the

defendant has no way to anticipate all of the

proof that is to be presented by the

plaintiff and, therefore, cannot prepare in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1375

advance always for issues that may arise and

know how to construct his defense.

As far as playing roulette by

bringing in witnesses that have not been

interviewed -- first of all, according to the

defendant, he has spoken with these

witnesses. And in addition to that, if a

party wants to play roulette and take that

chance, the Court has no control over it.

The bottom line is that the Court

does not feel that the motion is well taken,

and I'm going to deny it.

MR. MYERS: Your Honor, at this

time I would just like to ask for sufficient

time to file a Rule 9 application for

interlocutory appeal on this -- on this

point. And I would cite in 9(A)(1)

irreparable injury. There have been

privileges asserted with respect to work

product and the like. And if a witness is

forced to take the stand and made to testify,

that privilege is, for all intents and

purposes, lost.

Second, with respect to

prosecutorial immunity -- and the case is

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1376

going that way in terms of required showing

before a prosecutor should be called as a

witness. Those very items are of such a

nature as they would be lost unless allowed

to be fully litigated within the -- the

appellate process.

THE COURT: I'm going to deny

your request. Anything further?

MR. GARRISON: No, sir.

MR. PEPPER: No, Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right. The

Court is going to take ten minutes.

(Brief break taken.)

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor, if it

please the Court, the plaintiffs are nearing

the end of their case. And in the absence of

the defendant, Mr. Loyd Jowers, plaintiffs

have decided that based on an earlier

deposition of Mr. Jowers, it might be just as

cost effective in terms of time to read

portions of that deposition into the record

and putting the entire deposition into

evidence, along with the relevant exhibits.

THE COURT: All right.

MR. PEPPER: That saves us

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1377

having to go to Mr. Jowers and deposing him

again. This deposition was taken on the 2nd

of November, 1994, in an earlier case styled

James Earl Ray, Plaintiff, versus Loyd

Jowers, Raul, and other unknown co-

conspirators, Case Number 641892-0.

On Page 238 of the deposition, a

question to Mr. Jowers had to do with an

interview he had given to an ABC reporter,

Mr. Sam Donaldson. And leading up to the

question was: "He is saying: Did James Earl

Ray kill Martin Luther King? Do you see your

answer to that question--"

Answer -- this is the defendant,

Mr. Jowers -- "yes."

Question: "-- as it appears in the

transcript? Was that your response to that

question Mr. Donaldson asked?"

Answer: "No."

Question: "Then he said, do you

know who killed Martin Luther King?"

And the answer, Mr. Jowers:

"Mr. Pepper, I think I better take the Fifth

Amendment on that. Do you want me to read it

to you?"

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1378

Question: "Yes."

Mr. Jowers: "On the advice of my

attorney, I invoke the right to refuse to

answer on the Fifth Amendment of the

Constitution on the grounds that it might

tend to incriminate me."

Question: "That's fair enough.

That transcript that we've entered into the

record says: Do you know who killed Martin

Luther King, Jr.? The transcript has you

saying: Yes.

"You have refused to repeat that

answer here before us. Are you prepared,

though, to deny that you gave that answer at

that time?"

Mr. Jowers' answer: "Do you want me

to read this to you again?"

Question: "Yes."

Answer, Mr. Jowers: "On the advice

of my attorney, I take the privilege to plead

the Fifth Amendment according to the United

States Constitution that it might tend to

incriminate me."

Question: "Mr. Jowers, would you

take that position in respect of each of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1379

those highlighted questions in the text, or

is there any of those questions that you feel

that you could safely answer?"

Answer, Mr. Jowers: "I plead the

Fifth on all those questions."

Question: "On all of these?"

Answer: "Yes, sir. After going

back and reading, pleading the Fifth

Amendment."

Question: "I understand that. You

made that clear."

Dr. Pepper: "I'd just like to note,

Counsel, for the record with exception to the

pleading of the Fifth by Mr. Jowers on a

basis of the fact that the accuracy of the

transcript has been already agreed to and

entered into the record, and that being the

case it becomes our position --"

Attorney Garrison: "Okay.

Dr. Pepper, we will stipulate that the

questions were asked and Mr. Jowers gave

these answers."

Dr. Pepper: "Okay. We accept

that stipulation."

(End of Deposition testimony.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1380

MR. PEPPER: Now, Exhibit 1 to

that deposition was the transcript of an ABC

news PrimeTime Live program, which was

televised on December 16, 1993. And in the

course of that program, in the course of that

interview, the following exchange took

place.

(Reading from Exhibit 1.)

Donaldson: "Mr. Jowers, did James

Earl Ray kill Martin Luther King?"

Loyd Jowers: "No, sir, he did not."

Donaldson: "Do you know who killed

Dr. King?"

Mr. Jowers: "I know who was paid to

do it."

Donaldson: "Was there a conspiracy

involving more than one person?"

Mr. Jowers: "There was a

conspiracy. Yes, sir, sure was."

Donaldson: "Were you involved in

this conspiracy to kill Martin Luther King,

Jr.?"

Mr. Jowers: "I was involved in it

indirectly."

Mr. Jowers, continuing on Page 2:

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1381

"Liberto had done me a large favor. I owed

him a favor. You know, at least I thought I

did."

Donaldson: "Did there come a time

when he came and asked you to repay that

favor?"

Mr. Jowers: "Yes, sir."

Donaldson: "And was it a large

favor he wanted in return?"

Mr. Jowers: "Yes, sir."

Donaldson: "What did Frank Liberto

ask you to do?"

Mr. Jowers: "He asked me to handle

some money transaction, hire someone to

assassinate Dr. Martin Luther King."

Donaldson: "To kill Dr. King?"

Mr. Jowers: "Yes, sir. He asked me

if I know someone. I told him I thought I

knew someone who would probably do it."

Donaldson: "And he gave you some

money?"

Mr. Jowers: "Yes, sir."

Donaldson: "Large amount of money?"

Mr. Jowers: "Large amount of money,

yes, sir. Delivered it to the cafe."

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1382

Donaldson on a voice-over:

"PrimeTime has been told there was

approximately $100,000 delivered to Jowers in

a produce box, but that's not all he

received. Jowers says another man came to

see him, a man whose name sounded something

like Raul."

Mr. Jowers: "And he looked like he

was part Mexican, possibly part Indian,

because he didn't have a heavy beard, talked

with an accent."

Donaldson: "Did he bring a rifle

with him?"

Mr. Jowers: "Yes, sir. He brought

a rifle in a box."

Donaldson: "What did he ask you to

do with this rifle?"

Mr. Jowers: "He asked me to hold

the rifle until we made -- he made

arrangements or we made arrangements, one or

the other of us, for the killing."

Donaldson voice-over: "So now

Jowers had the money, had the rifle, had been

asked to hire a shooter, but he says Frank

Liberto also provided a cover."

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1383

Donaldson: "Did he talk about the

police?"

Mr. Jowers: "Liberto? Yes, sir."

Donaldson: "What did he say?"

Mr. Jowers: "He said they wouldn't

be there. Said they wouldn't be there that

night."

Donaldson: "Did he say there would

be a decoy there?"

Mr. Jowers: "Yes, sir. Said he had

set it up where it looked like somebody else

did the killing."

Donaldson voice-over: "Enter James

Earl Ray. Was he part of the conspiracy?"

Mr. Jowers: "He was part of it, but

I don't believe he knew he was part of it."

Donaldson: "Well, Mr. Jowers, did

you find someone to do the killing?"

Mr. Jowers: "Yes, sir."

Donaldson: "Why would a person

participate in a conspiracy to kill

Dr. King?"

Mr. Jowers: "A portion of it,

naturally, was for money. Any involvement I

might have had in it was doing a friend --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1384

doing a friend a favor."

Donaldson: "Would it have been

because you hated Dr. King?"

Mr. Jowers: "No, I didn't hate

Dr. King."

Donaldson: "Or hated black people?"

Mr. Jowers: "No, sir. It was for a

friend, doing a friend a favor that I owed

him, a large favor."

Donaldson: "Well, is doing a friend

a favor called murder the kind of favor you

would do?"

Mr. Jowers: "Depends on how good a

friend it is and what you owed the friend."

(End of testimony read from

Exhibit 1.)

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor, that's

the end of the portion of the exhibit to be

inserted into the record, and move that the

entire deposition of November 2, 1994, and

all of the exhibits attached thereto be

included in this record as plaintiffs'

exhibit at this time.

THE COURT: All right, sir.

(Whereupon said documents were

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1385

marked as Collective Exhibit Number 30.)

THE COURT: Next order of

proof?

MR. GARRISON: If Your Honor

please, we may have portions of the

deposition we may want to read.

THE COURT: Oh, okay.

MR. GARRISON: If I could have

just a second here.

THE COURT: All right.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, my

associate, Mr. Bledsoe, is going to read from

the deposition.

THE COURT: All right, sir.

MR. GARRISON: Just read the

questions and the answers that were given.

MR. BLEDSOE: The beginning of

the deposition, question by Dr. Pepper:

(Reading from the November 2,

1994, transcript.)

Q. Mr. Jowers, thank you very much for

coming. I appreciate your cooperation

particularly during this period of time when

there has been a great deal of stress and

difficulty. And we are very grateful to your

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1386

very able counsel, Mr. Garrison, for

assisting in clearing his busy calendar to be

here and help us.

We -- I would like to begin almost

at the beginning in terms of who you are

because I've known you for 16 years.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. But I don't know a great deal about

you.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. So I would like to go back to the

beginning. Could you tell us where you were

born and where you were raised.

A. I was born in Lexington, Tennessee,

on November 20, 1926.

Q. Where did you spend your childhood?

A. I'm sorry, I can't hear you.

Q. Where did you spend your childhood?

A. I moved from there, I was a two-year

old, and my childhood was spent in Kenton,

Tennessee.

Q. Where did you go to school in Kenton?

A. Kenton High School, yes, sir.

Q. Did you graduate from Kenton High

School?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1387

A. No, sir, I did not.

Q. What did you do after school?

A. I went into the military.

Q. Where did you go in the military;

which branch of the service?

A. Navy.

Q. In the Navy. What did you do there?

A. I was the helmsman on the ship. I

went to school for six weeks to be a helmsman

on a ship.

Q. What period of time would that have

been?

A. What period of time?

Q. Yeah, when was that?

A. 1944 through '46 -- through part of

'46.

Q. Where were you stationed?

A. On a ship out of Norfolk, Virginia.

Q. Off the Norfolk coast?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And what did you do after the --

after you were discharged?

A. After I was discharged in Memphis,

Tennessee, or Millington, I moved to Memphis

and continued living here and went to school.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1388

Q. But you mentioned Millington. Were

you sent to Millington as part of your --

A. I was sent to Millington to be

discharged, yes, sir, from Norfolk.

Q. Were you there just for the purpose

of discharge or --

A. Yes.

Q. -- were you stationed there?

A. No, sir, I was not stationed there,

just for purposes of being discharged.

Q. You were discharged out of

Millington?

A. Right.

Q. What was your rank on termination?

A. Seaman II.

Q. What was the nature of your

discharge?

A. Honorable discharge.

Q. And your parents, Mr. Jowers, where

were they during all this period of time?

A. They lived in Kenton, Tennessee.

Q. What was your father's occupation?

A. He was a farmer.

Q. So you were a farming family?

A. Yes, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1389

Q. Did you have any brothers or sisters?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Who were they?

A. Well, I had an oldest brother named

Carl; brother named Max; younger brother

named Billy; older sister named Mary; one

older one named Nellie and one named Willa

Mae, Elsie and Dolly.

Q. That's a large family.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did they all survive childhood?

A. Yes, sir, all of them.

Q. Are they all still alive?

A. No, sir, some of them are.

Q. Some of them are.

A. Oldest brother Carl is deceased; my

oldest sister Mary is deceased. All the rest

of them are still living.

Q. Did any of them move into Memphis or

did they stay --

A. I have two sisters living in Memphis

now, yes, sir.

Q. You have two sisters. Who are the

two sisters presently living in Memphis?

A. One of them's name is Willa Mae

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1390

Witherspoon and the other one's name is Elsie

Whitley.

Q. Elsie Whitley, and what was the name

of the Witherspoon?

A. Willa Mae.

Q. Willa Mae Witherspoon, and they

presently live in --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- Memphis?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. So you would have then entered

Memphis for purposes of living around 1946,

upon discharge?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Where did you live when you came to

Memphis in 1946?

A. I lived with my uncle at 612 St.

Pauly Street.

Q. Now, was that your mother's brother?

A. My mother's brother.

Q. Your mother's brother. And where did

you work when you were living there?

A. I went to school at JB Cook Company

on the GI Bill of Rights. I did finish that

course, almost two years.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1391

Q. Yes.

A. When I finished that, I went on to

the police department. I was a city

policeman. I don't know the exact date.

Some time in April or May of 1946 through all

of 1948. I resigned December 2, 1948.

Q. So you were on the police force for

nearly two years was it?

A. Yes, sir, two years.

Q. Two years. And you went to join the

police force after you took this training

course?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. You just applied to the police

force. Why did you think of becoming a

policeman at that point?

A. Well, I really can't explain it

except it seemed like a good job.

Q. So you applied. Did they have -- I

don't suppose they had any training academies

back in those days.

A. No, sir, they did not. You got all

your training with the older policemen.

Q. And what were your early duties when

you went on the police force?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1392

A. I went right into a squad car.

Q. You were on street patrols?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Primarily riding or on foot?

A. No, I was riding. They didn't have

foot patrols back then.

Q. What area of the city were you

assigned to?

A. Over a two-year period I run, I

guess, every ward in the city. They

transferred you from one ward to another back

then.

Q. Right.

A. You run this ward, like downtown was

Ward II this month, next month you might be

in east Memphis, Ward II. They just switched

everyone around, switched partners, switched

wards, automobiles, the whole nine yards.

Q. Who was your partner? You were in a

two-man squad car, were you?

A. Yes, sir, all cars were two-man.

Q. Who was your partner, do you recall?

A. I guess probably over two years I was

with about every policeman on the force.

Q. They rotated you?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1393

A. They rotated the partners also -- the

partners also every month. I'll give you a

couple of names. I can't remember all of

them.

Q. Sure. Who were some of the people

with whom you partnered?

A. Johnny Barger, I suppose that was the

first one I rode with.

Mr. Garrison: You said Barker?

THE WITNESS: Barger,

B A R G E R. Andy Chitwood was another one.

I think those were the first -- those were

the ones that I got my training from.

Q. (BY DR. PEPPER) Right.

A. Johnny went on to be field

inspector. Chitwood retired. Well, they're

both retired. They're both deceased now.

Q. Right.

Dr. Pepper: Mr. Garrison, as a

matter of procedure, do you mind if

Mr. Chastain -- if he has a question from

time to time, if he comes in?

Mr. Garrison: Go right ahead.

Dr. Pepper: So if there's something

that you would like --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1394

Mr. Garrison: Let's go off the

record.

(Off-the-record discussion.)

Q. (BY DR. PEPPER) So you were -- during

this period of time you were on squad car

duty and you were moving all over the city?

A. All over the city, yes, sir.

Q. Did they assign you -- was this just

regular patrol? Did you get assigned

particular duties such as vice squad or anti-

gambling or anything like that?

A. I was a city policeman.

Q. So you were on regular detail?

A. Back then we didn't have specialized

departments like they have now. If you had a

crime in your ward, we called them, I guess.

They may still be that, I don't know. The

police run that ward, done their darndest to

solve whatever it was.

Now, they had -- the only specialist

department they had back then was homicide.

The ward called work for the homicide

department. If they had any other department

other than homicide, I didn't know anything

about it.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1395

Q. Right.

A. They may have, but I didn't know

anything about it.

Q. You didn't know anything about it if

they did?

A. No, sir.

Q. Who was the chief of police during

these two years when you were on the force?

A. I don't remember his first name. His

last name was Perry. That was just a

figurehead here. The boss was the

commissioner.

Q. Right.

A. His name was Joe Boyle.

Q. Joe --

A. Boyle, B O Y L E. He done all the

hiring and firing.

Q. He did all the hiring and firing.

Was he related, as far as you know, to the

Boyles who had a financial interest in the

Chisca Hotel -- to that Boyle family?

A. I think it was the same family.

Q. Same family.

A. I'm not positive.

Q. One of them was a -- they were fairly

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1396

prominent local people?

A. Right.

Q. So you think there was a connection?

A. I'm sure it was. Because back

then -- I'm sure you've heard of Mr. Ed

Crump.

Q. Yes.

A. No one did anything here without his

approval, believe me they didn't.

Q. He pretty much ran the --

A. That includes the police department.

Q. -- city, didn't he?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Can you remember who some of the

inspectors were underneath the chief, such as

the homicide inspector?

A. Field inspectors is what they were

called back then. Was a name by the name of

John Dwyer. No -- yeah, John Dwyer.

Q. Dwyer?

A. Buddy Dwyer? I don't think Buddy and

John were the same.

Mr. Garrison: Yes, they were the

same.

The Witness: They were the same,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1397

but I couldn't remember.

Q. (BY DR. PEPPER) So he was an

inspector?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Who were some other inspectors that

you recall?

A. Well, now, the inspector, he had a

section of the city and they transferred him

also. He was my inspector the entire time

that I was a policeman.

Q. Uh-huh.

A. And the lieutenants, the one that

had -- I don't know how many cars, five or

six cars. He would go around and meet every

night to make sure we were doing what we were

supposed to do. He would be transferred to a

section of the city also.

Q. Right. But who were some of the

names of the people who were either

inspectors, captains, whom you can recall

now?

A. Well, my immediate captain was

Captain Lovejohn. I don't remember his first

name. If I ever knew it, I don't remember

it.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1398

Q. Lovejohn?

A. Lovejohn.

Q. Right. Okay. Any other captains you

recall, any other officers?

A. Police officers?

Q. Yes.

A. I guess if you give me enough time I

could remember half of them.

Q. Let me just throw some names and see

if they make any sense to you. One has been

mentioned earlier, "Zachary."

A. Yes, sir.

Q. What was Zachary's position back in

those days when you recall?

A. I recall him as being just a regular

patrolman like I was on a separate shift.

Q. Uh-huh.

A. The way that thing operated back

then, you can have -- he may have been my

relief at one time or another. I can't

remember all those other policemen.

Q. Did you know then Patrolman Zachary?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. You knew him back in '46?

A. Yes, sir, but he wasn't on the same

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1399

shift I was on.

Q. Different shift?

A. I believe he was my relief shift.

Q. Did you come to -- continue to know

him over the years?

A. After I left the police department?

Q. Yes.

A. Just in passing is all. I think he

wrote me a ticket one time after I got out of

the police department for speeding.

Q. I see. Do you recall when he started

to move up in the force?

A. No, sir, I do not.

Q. Okay. Did you know Sam Evans, Sr.,

back then?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. What was his rank?

A. Just regular patrolman.

Q. He was street patrolman as well. He

started out that way?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And at the time when you left the

force was he still a patrolman or had he

moved up?

A. He was on a separate shift, sir. I'm

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1400

not sure.

Q. You're not sure?

A. No.

Q. But he was a career policeman as

well?

A. Sure.

Q. Did you know Inspector Evans pretty

well when you were on the force?

A. Just in passing is all.

Q. Did you continue to know him after

you left the force?

A. No.

Q. You didn't have much contact --

A. I didn't have any contact with him

that I remember.

Q. -- with him after you left?

A. No, sir.

Q. How about the man who eventually

became chief, McDonald, did you know him back

in those days?

A. I knew him, yes, sir, but he was

field inspector on -- well, I guess you would

call it, if I was on the first shift, he

would be on the second shift.

Q. He was an inspector even back then?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1401

A. Yes, sir.

Q. That long ago?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. How about Chief Lux?

A. Chief Lux, he was on a separate

shift. He wasn't on the one I was on.

Q. Was he also an inspector back then or

was he --

A. I'm not sure.

Q. That's fine. These are -- I'm taking

you back a long way. If you don't remember,

just say I don't remember.

A. That's fine.

Q. How about Graden Tynes?

A. Grady?

Q. Graden Tynes, T Y N E S.

A. Yes, sir, I know him.

Q. You knew him?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. How well did you know him?

A. I suppose about as well as I know you

or anyone like that.

Q. Uh-huh, yeah.

A. I'm not sure if he was anything other

than a just regular patrolman. I don't think

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1402

he was.

Q. Right.

A. We went to work at the police

department -- I think he went to work two or

three months after I did.

Q. He came on after you did?

A. I think so, yes, sir. Either before

or after, relatively close.

Q. Right.

A. I never run with him because he was

on a separate shift than I was on.

Q. He was. Did you know Jule Ray?

A. Jule who?

Q. Ray, R A Y. Jule Ray.

A. No.

Q. He eventually became a captain in the

same department as Mr. Tynes, but you don't

remember him?

A. No, sir, I do not.

Q. How about a man who eventually became

an inspector, Don Smith, does that mean

anything to you?

A. I knew Mr. Smith casually. I

remember when he left the patrol and went

into homicide.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1403

Q. Uh-huh.

A. But I'm not sure if he stayed there

long. Seems to me he didn't stay there very

long.

Q. Now, are we talking about the same

Smith?

A. I'm not sure.

Q. I'm talking about Don Smith, not

Tommy Smith. Tommy Smith was a homicide

detective. Don Smith may have been in

homicide at one time, I don't know.

A. I only knew one. I didn't know the

other one. Don was the one that I knew.

Q. Don was the one you knew, okay.

A. He was on a separate shift than I was

on. I think he was our relief in the squad

cars on occasion back when we were policemen.

Q. Right. Okay. Did you, Mr. Jowers,

keep contact up with any of these names that

we have been through? Now, after you left

the force, did you have any kind of ongoing

social or other contact with them?

A. I did with Grady Tynes, yes, sir.

Q. You did. What was the nature of your

contact with Inspector Tynes?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1404

A. Well, his wife and my wife went to

school together.

Q. Right.

A. In a little place out from Kenton,

Tennessee, called Mason Hall. In fact, they

graduated from that school.

Q. Right.

A. And we -- we were fairly close

friends. We never talked about police

business after I was not a policeman anymore.

Q. This was your first wife that you're

referring to?

A. Yes.

MR. GARRISON: Go to 30 to 34.

MR. BLEDSOE: Okay. Beginning

on Page 30 at the top of the page. I'm

sorry, the middle of the page.

(Resume reading from the

deposition.)

Q. Many years after the fact when you

had chance to reflect on the police

department back then, was there a fair amount

of corruption that you observed in your

course of your work as a policeman?

A. Well, not a great deal. I think that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1405

was the purpose of shifting everyone around

all the time. It could have been without me

knowing about it, but I doubt there was very

much.

Q. Right. But if there was corruption,

what form did it take?

A. Well, of course, I can tell you what

I heard. I heard the ward was running crap

games, allowing bootlegging on Sunday.

Q. Minor things like that?

A. Minor things like that. But as far

as that ever taking place, I just don't know.

Q. Right. This is a very useful way of

getting facts on the record, Mr. Jowers, by

you just saying, this is what I heard, but I

don't know or -- I'm perfectly happy for you

to do that any time you want to. It's a

useful way of getting information out without

you being in the frame, if you know what I

mean.

A. Uh-huh.

Q. We all hear things.

A. Sure.

Q. Why did you decide then to leave the

police force?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1406

A. Well, they didn't pay enough really

for a man to make a living.

Q. Right.

A. They did not. I drew $105 every two

weeks.

Q. Not a lot of money.

A. That's not enough money. Even back

then it wasn't enough money to really get by

on.

Q. In the course of your work in the

police department and coming toward the end

of it, did you have contact with many

business people in Memphis?

A. Many who?

Q. Business people, businessmen.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you come into contact with some

of them?

A. Yes.

Q. Who were some of the more prominent

business people that you knew in Memphis, do

you recall?

A. Well, I guess I better start with the

top, Mr. Ed Crump. I was -- you wouldn't

call me a personal friend, but I knew him and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1407

he knew my name.

Q. You did know Mr. Crump?

A. Yes.

Q. How did you come to know Mr. Crump?

A. I think the first time I met

Mr. Crump was where I was going to school

under the GI Bill for JB Cook Company. He

and Mr. Cook were good friends. That's the

first time I met him.

Q. Right.

A. That was about -- I had only been

there a couple of months when Mr. Crump come

back.

Q. Uh-huh.

A. I guess that's the most prominent

businessman that I knew.

Q. It probably would be. Let's go down

from there. Who were some of the other

businessmen who you knew?

A. Well, Mr. Dave Jolly. He owned Jolly

Can Company, a large cab company, made a lot

of money. I knew Mr. Hamilton Smythe. He

was -- he didn't own Yellow Cab, but he

managed Yellow Cab Company.

Q. Did Mr. Hamilton Smythe eventually

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1408

come to buy Yellow Cab?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. At the time that you knew him, he was

just the manager?

A. Manager of Yellow Cab.

Q. Was he --

A. Dave Jolly owned Jolly Cab Company.

Q. Was Mr. Smythe a pretty wealthy man

or was he just average means?

A. His family was wealthy. His father

was in -- I knew him, not real well. He was

in the construction business.

Q. Right.

A. He built a number of subdivisions

over the city. One I can remember in

particular out in -- well, it's probably

Midtown now, but back then it was way out

east. In fact, it was out of the city.

Q. I see.

MR. GARRISON: 40 through 42.

MR. BLEDSOE: Beginning at the

top of Page 40.

(Resume reading from the

deposition.)

Q. So you started off at Veterans Cab

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1409

Company in 1948?

A. No, I was still a policeman.

Q. You were still a policeman?

A. Yes, sir. We were organized in --

I'm trying to remember the month. It was

early '48, but I was still a

policeman, continued to be a policeman. No,

it was '47.

Q. Because you left in '48?

A. It was the last part of '47. Seems

to me like September of '47.

Q. Right.

A. I was trying to make it '48, but I

resigned in December '48, so it had to be

'47.

Q. Right. So you were still working as

a policeman and you had this Veterans Cab

Company?

A. I was part of it. Actually, it was

against the Memphis City ordinance to do

anything like that.

Q. Right. Well, people moonlight all

the time, particularly if they don't have

enough money.

A. Right.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1410

Q. They have to do that sometimes. Who

was your dispatcher back then, do you recall?

A. At the cab company?

Q. Yes.

A. One of them was Paul Brandon. That

was his job.

Q. So he actually worked as dispatcher?

A. Yes.

Q. How long did he stay on as dispatcher

for this cab company; do you recall that?

A. Oh, a number of years. He went from

dispatcher to assistant manager. It seems to

me like he left about 1950 and he went on to

the police department.

Q. He changed. He went to the police

department you --

A. Police department.

Q. -- you had come off?

A. Sold his stock. I bought his stock

in the cab company. Which originally we

weren't supposed to be able to sell the

stock, but we changed the bylaws of the

company where we could buy and sell stock.

Q. Did you become the largest

stockholder at that point in time?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1411

A. No, sir. Six shares was all I ever

owned for a number of years.

Q. Who was the largest single

shareholder in the company, do you recall?

A. We didn't have one individual who

owned the majority until a number of years.

Q. Uh-huh.

A. I think before anyone really got

control of the company where I would be just

one man was about, heck, I don't know, '54,

'55, somewhere in there.

MR. GARRISON: 171 through 176.

MR. BLEDSOE: Question by

Dr. Pepper.

(Resume reading from the

deposition.)

Q. When you came to work that morning --

that next morning that Mr. Chastain is

referring to, did you come alone or did you

drive anybody with you?

A. No, sir, I drove by myself.

Q. You drove in by yourself --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- that next morning? Were you

joined -- who was the staff person who came

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1412

on duty? Did you have any employees?

A. Bobbi.

Q. Bobbi?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. And how did she get to work that

morning, do you recall?

A. I have no idea. Rode a bus, I guess.

Q. She just came in and she met you

there?

A. She came in to work, yeah.

Q. She came in to work and met you?

A. I don't recall whether she was late

or not. She could have been, but I don't

recall.

Q. Right. Mr. Jowers, have you had a

chance to look over these statements that you

gave back at the time in 1968? During the

break did you have a chance to review them?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Is there anything with respect to

this statement that you gave to the Memphis

Police Department that you discussed with

Counsel that you would wish to amend or

change at this time?

A. No, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1413

Q. That's as you recall it?

A. Yes, sir.

Dr. Pepper: We'll admit that.

Q. (BY DR. PEPPER) This is a statement

given -- this is not a statement. This is

what's known as a 302 taken by the -- it's a

report of an interview done by the FBI on the

7th of April, 1968, with you. It's even

possible you never saw this one before

because often -- most people don't get a

chance to see that. It's an interview with

the FBI, but this talks about a stranger who

was in the Grill.

And I'm wondering if you recall that

interview. Is that an accurate report of the

interview that you gave the FBI with respect

to that stranger?

A. As I remember.

Q. It is. It's an accurate report?

A. Yes, sir.

Mr. Garrison: Dr. Pepper, would you

like to have this marked too?

Dr. Pepper: I would like to have

this marked if that's all right.

The Witness: For the record, that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1414

statement was not given on the 7th.

Q. (BY DR. PEPPER) It was not?

A. No, sir, the next day. The next day

when I talked to the FBI is the only time I

talked to them.

Q. Mr. Jowers, you're right. The

statement was taped on the 7th and it was

given the next day by you.

A. Right.

Q. You're quite right. I'm going to put

this in and possibly come back to this.

There is a photograph waiting. This

statement was given on -- the date of this

statement is on February 6, 1969. I'm

wondering if you would just take a look at

that and see if that is accurate.

A. Yes, sir.

Dr. Pepper: If Mr. Garrison has no

objection, we'll mark that and put it in.

Q. (BY DR. PEPPER) Now, this is the text

of an interview done with you by the BBC and

it covers a range -- covers a range of

matters, Inspector Charlie Stephens and his

drinking, that you recalled.

A. Uh-huh.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1415

Q. It discusses the stranger, you are

returning, a whole variety of matters. Would

you just take a look at that. I think you

have probably seen it during the break, but I

just want to be sure that you are happy with

what they reported that you said there.

A. Yes, sir.

Dr. Pepper: We'll mark that.

Q. (BY DR. PEPPER) I want to show you

this photograph and ask you if you have ever

seen this person before, if you recognize

him.

A. No, sir, I don't recall ever seeing

him.

Q. You don't recall having seen this man

before around the Grill or anywhere?

A. No, sir.

Q. Okay, that's fair enough.

MR. GARRISON: 188 through 195.

MR. BLEDSOE: Okay.

(Resume reading from the

deposition.)

Q. I know, but which staff or waitress,

employee, came in that particular morning on

April 4th?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1416

A. My cook come in, Bobbi come in her

regular time. I think she come in either

7:00 or 7:30. I don't remember the exact

time, but --

Q. Right. She came in at 7:00 or 7:30?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did anyone else come in with Bobbi

that morning?

A. No, sir.

Q. Who was on duty in the course of that

morning?

A. I worked the front and Bobbi was in

the back cooking lunch.

Q. So Bobbi was in the back and you were

in the front?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. So then you would leave at your usual

time, did you?

A. Yes.

Q. Was Bobbi there alone or was there

another waitress there?

A. Bobbi was alone.

Q. Bobbi was alone?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Are you saying that Betty Spates did

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1417

not come in that morning at all?

A. No, she was in the afternoon shift.

Q. What time would she have come in

then?

A. She was scheduled to come in at 4

o'clock.

Q. Do you know or do you recall if she

did in fact come at 4 o'clock that day?

A. She did not, no.

Q. She didn't come in at 4 o'clock that

day?

A. When I come to work, Bobbi told me

that she called in. One of her children was

sick. She wasn't going to be able to work.

Q. So who did you have working that

afternoon?

A. No one. I worked myself. I worked

it by myself.

Q. So you were working that afternoon by

yourself?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Wasn't Bobbi there?

A. She left at 4 o'clock.

Q. She left at 4 o'clock?

A. Yes, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1418

Q. And Alda, where was Alda?

A. Alda?

Q. Alda Washington, Alda Mae?

A. I don't think she was still working

for me at that time. If she was, it was just

part time, but she was not working that day.

Q. And Rosie Lee Dabney?

A. She had already been gone several

months before then.

Q. She was no longer working?

A. No, sir.

Q. So really who did you have working?

Was Lena working?

A. No, sir.

Q. Where was Lena?

A. Lena had already gone too.

Q. She had left, been discharged -- she

left?

A. Right.

Q. Bobbi was the only one working?

A. I had Bobbi, Betty and myself. And

Alda Mae worked part time, but she was not

working on that day.

Q. She was not working on that day?

A. No.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1419

Q. So you went away in the morning.

Bobbi was there working.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. You returned at about what time?

A. Four o'clock.

Q. At about 4 o'clock. Did you talk to

Bobbi when you came back in there?

A. Just for a few minutes. She told me

that Betty wasn't coming in because one of

her children was sick. She did work over

that afternoon, it seems to me, about 30

minutes to help me to get ready to handle the

night business by myself.

Q. So Betty didn't come. Alda stayed --

Bobbi stayed with you a little longer?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. Then she left and that left you

there, effectively, all alone?

A. Right.

Q. Did she give any other reports on any

other people that came in that day or that

she had seen that day?

A. Not anything out of the ordinary. Of

course, she didn't have to tell me about

Charlie Stephens being down there drunk

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1420

because he was there drunk when I went in.

Q. Right.

A. Actually, I went right in and went to

work because she was real busy.

Q. I see. So you went right in and went

right to work?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. What time did you leave that morning,

9 or 10 o'clock as usual?

A. I think it was 10:00, 10:30.

Q. Ten or 10:30 you left that morning?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. To return at what time?

A. I returned at 4 o'clock.

Q. At 4 o'clock?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. Which car were you driving that day;

do you recall?

A. I was driving the Cadillac.

Q. Where was the Rambler -- the brown

Rambler station wagon?

A. My wife was driving that.

Q. Your wife was driving that. When you

came back at 4:00 and you parked your car,

where did you park?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1421

A. Well, when I turned the corner and

drove in there, there was a white car sitting

right in front of the building, right in my

parking spot. So I pulled right up against

him like that.

Q. Right.

A. Left my car close to the fire plug.

Q. Left your car close to the fire plug?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. What kind of car was that, do you

recall?

A. All I can recall about it, it was a

white or light colored Mustang.

Q. Did you look at the license plate?

A. It was an out-of-state license.

Q. Out-of-state. Did you know which

state?

A. Didn't pay no attention what state, I

sure didn't.

Q. Did you notice any other cars parked

either behind you or in front of the Mustang?

A. Well, in front of the Mustang there

was cars all the way to the corner. I didn't

move my car down there because there was no

place to move it in front of the Mustang or

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1422

back the other way. All that was full of

automobiles too.

Q. Do you know which kinds of

automobiles those were?

A. I have no idea.

Q. You don't remember which ones they

were. When you arrived to work, you

proceeded from which street onto South Main?

How did you come into South Main?

A. I come down -- I would come down the

expressway and get off -- sometimes I get off

on Vance, sometimes I get off on Crump and

come around. I think that afternoon I come

around because I was going in the right

direction where I wouldn't have to turn

around.

MR. GARRISON: Continue on to

213.

MR. BLEDSOE: From there?

MR. GARRISON: To 213.

MR. BLEDSOE: To 213?

MR. GARRISON: Mm-hum.

(Resume reading from the

deposition.)

Q. Which way did you -- which side of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1423

the street did you come out, did you proceed

west on? Which one led you up to South Main

Street?

A. Huling, Talbot, the one that went

right down by the fire station. I'm not

really sure which street that is.

Q. Well, that's Butler. By the fire

station is Butler.

A. Butler, yes.

Q. So you came up Butler?

A. Come up Butler where I would be on

the right side of the street.

Q. Proceeded north on South Main, pulled

right in there and then went right inside?

A. Right.

Q. Then you began to work. How many

people were in there at the time?

A. There were several people in there.

A lot of them was from M.E. Carter.

Q. Do you remember some of the names of

some of the people? If you could close your

eyes for a moment, could you recall who were

actually in there on the 4th of April around

4 o'clock?

A. I really can't. I know Charlie

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1424

Stephens was in there.

Q. How long did he stay?

A. He didn't stay but a few minutes

after I got there.

Q. But you don't remember any other

ones?

A. Absolutely, no, sir.

Q. But you have previously -- when your

memory was fresher back at the time, you did

give some names and you've reviewed that.

A. At that time I could have told you

everyone in there.

Q. Sure. But we didn't expect you to

recall all of those things. You didn't leave

the Grill at any time once you arrived there?

A. No, sir, I did not.

Q. What did you proceed to do at that

point in time when you got in? What did you

do? Did you go in the back? Did you work on

the counter?

A. Right up front working the counter.

Like I said, the cook stayed over long enough

to get the food out on the steam table for

the supper crowd.

Q. Then she left?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1425

A. Then she left, yes.

Q. Was Harold Parker in there? I'm

going to just jog your memory a bit.

A. Harold never did come in until --

normally around 5:00, 5:30.

Q. Did he come in, as you recall, around

5:00, 5:30 that day?

A. I think he come in a little earlier

than normal for some reason or other, 4:30.

Q. Right.

A. Because I had only been there a short

while when he come in.

Q. Right. Now, when Bobbi left, did

you -- what did you do? Did you take over

all of her duties yourself?

A. Yeah. Sure. If they wanted a

sandwich, I prepared it for them. I waited

on them just like a waitress would.

Q. There were quite a number of people

there at the time?

A. Yes, sir, sure was.

Q. Around the time we know the shooting

took place, as you may recall, was slightly

after 6 o'clock.

A. Uh-huh.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1426

Q. Where were you at the time?

A. I was behind the counter working.

Q. The counter being -- we've seen it

down along on the side?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. What were you doing?

A. When the actual noise went off, I was

drawing a beer, a pitcher of beer. It took a

few minutes to draw. I had it about half

drawn when the noise went off and I quit.

Q. Right. What did you do? What did

you do when you heard the noise?

A. I went back in the kitchen door. It

sounded like a noise in the kitchen so I went

and checked. Walked by Parker and asked, did

you hear that noise? And he said, yes, he

did. He didn't know what it was. I looked

inside the kitchen and wasn't nothing there.

So I went on back to finish drawing my

pitcher of beer.

Q. What was the next thing that you knew

that something was wrong?

A. When the police come to the door,

they told me to lock the door and don't --

there had been a shooting upstairs and told

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1427

me to lock the door and don't let anyone in

or out. So that's what I done.

Q. So you locked the door?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Everyone that was in stayed in?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. You let no one else into the place?

A. Not until the policeman brought a

black guy there and told me to put him in

there, that he was out in the street and it

was too dangerous out there.

Q. Who was that black guy, do you know?

A. Frank Holt.

Q. Are you sure that the man brought to

the door and put inside was Frank Holt and

not Robert Wheeler?

A. I'm sure it was Frank Holt, sure.

Q. You're sure of that?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Because there is an FBI statement

that says that Robert Wheeler was put inside

there. You don't recall a second person

being put in?

A. I'm sure I'd remember if it was, but

I don't think so.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1428

Q. Right. At about what time was

Mr. Holt put in there?

A. Quite a while after that. Could have

been as late as 7 o'clock.

Q. That late?

A. Yes, sir. It was already beginning

to get dark and 6 o'clock -- it was still

real daylight.

Q. Do you remember, Mr. Jowers, a

particular customer who ordered eggs and

sausage in the restaurant that afternoon or

at some point in the course of that day, a

man who had eggs and sausage and then

returned the next morning and also had eggs

and sausage?

A. Sure, I recall that.

Q. You recall that man?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. In fact, you took some action with

respect to that man, didn't you? What do you

recall that you did?

A. I told the police about him going in

there. What made me remember him being there

was ordering breakfast up in the day, almost

time for lunch.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1429

Q. Right.

A. He ordered a breakfast special. I

went on working on lunch and I fixed his

breakfast for him. The next morning -- and

they told me if he came back in, be sure to

call them. So the next morning around 9:00,

9:30, he come in again, ordered the same

thing.

Q. Same thing?

A. Sitting at the counter, same place.

Q. About what time -- you're sitting at

the counter on the side?

A. Sure.

Q. About what time did he order this

breakfast, this eggs and sausage meal?

A. The first time?

Q. Yes.

A. I think that's the last thing I done

before I went home, so it had to be close to

11 o'clock. We already had most of the steam

table out.

Q. So you were going to leave -- you

were leaving around 10:30, elevenish; is that

what you're saying?

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1430

Q. Did you actually prepare that eggs

and sausage for him?

A. Yes, sir, I sure did.

Q. So you served him yourself?

A. I sure did. I did also the next

morning.

Q. Also the next morning?

A. Yes, sir. I also went and called the

police for him.

Q. This is a report of that actually

written by, when he was a reporter,

Mr. Chastain here. I just wonder if you

could, if you would take a quick look at

that. And this is -- one and two are the

relevant portions that deal with this

instant.

I'll strike out all the rest, but I

want to make sure that that seems to be

accurate. If anything doesn't gibe with your

memory -- I'm trying to get the historical

record correct here, or we will change it.

A. I don't see anything wrong with it.

Q. Is that basically accurate? Is that

sort of what happened?

A. (Witness nodding head affirmatively.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1431

Dr. Pepper: What I would like you

to do is strike all that that doesn't relate

to this. I'm boxing in what I think is.

Mr. Garrison: Okay.

Dr. Pepper: Just stuff that relates

to this.

Q. (BY DR. PEPPER) Who was that police

captain that told you about this fellow

having some real connections here? Do you

recall who that captain was?

A. No, sir, I do not.

Q. Or remember his name at all?

A. No, sir.

Q. It wasn't Captain Jack Wallace, or it

couldn't have been Evans, he was an inspector

back then.

A. No, sir.

Q. You don't remember --

A. It could have been, but I don't

really know.

Q. Or Mulner?

A. No, sir.

Q. But you do remember this man who

appeared and had eggs and sausage in your

place on the 4th of April in the late-ish

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1432

morning and then early again the next

morning, and you called the police and they

came and took him away?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Could you tell us now whether this

looks like the man or whether you can say

whether that was the man. And this is a

copy.

A. No, sir, I don't believe that's him.

No, sir, I sure don't.

Q. You don't remember that this is the

man?

A. No, sir, I do not.

Q. How would you describe this fellow?

How tall was he? And do you recall, did he

have dark hair?

A. It would be hard to describe him now

because that's been a long time ago.

Q. Yes, it has. Do you recall at

various times you have identified this man as

the man who was there? Do you recall that

having been shown these photographs

previously, years ago, that you did identify

the man?

A. It seems now to me I recall seeing

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1433

the picture that I said it looked like him.

I didn't say it was him.

Q. Okay. Photographs are tricky

anyway. This is a mug shot which gives you a

slightly different perspective. Does that

ring any bell with you?

A. No, sir, it does not.

Q. That doesn't either. Okay. That's

fine. Now, during all of this period of time

in the aftermath of the shooting of Dr. King,

you continued business, did you, as usual in

the restaurant?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you follow the events of the case

that were going on?

A. The events of what?

Q. The events of the case when they

apprehended Mr. Ray, brought him back, were

you aware of basically what was happening in

1968?

A. Just the account of it on the news or

the newspaper, yes.

Q. Did you ever yourself go up to the

courthouse at any time when there were

hearings going on with Mr. Ray?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1434

A. No, I did not.

Q. You don't recall ever going up there?

A. No, sir.

Q. Have you ever discussed the case with

anyone?

A. Not that I recall other than

investigators asking me questions. Or they

had one investigator there that worked for

them, I guess asked me every question in the

world I suppose.

Q. Which agency was he with?

A. What was his name, Lewis?

Mr. Garrison: Mr. Hamby.

Q. (BY DR. PEPPER) Did the Memphis

Police Department call him?

A. No, he was a private investigator.

Mr. Garrison: Oh, that was Renfroe

Hayes.

Q. (BY DR. PEPPER) Oh, Renfroe Hayes.

A. Mr. Chastain remembers him, I'm sure.

Q. We all remember Renfroe Hayes.

A. I just couldn't remember his name.

Q. He asked you lots of questions, did

he?

A. Every day.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1435

Q. He just came by and probably asked

the same ones over and over again.

A. Over and over, yes, sir.

Q. He might even have forgotten that he

asked them. So, anyway, you were subject

obviously to an awful lot of questions.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you during this period of time

ever have any contact with Mr. Frank Liberto?

A. No, sir.

Q. You never saw him or talked to him or

had any contact at all with him?

A. No, sir.

Q. Nor anyone representing him or --

A. No, sir.

Q. -- being close to him. What happened

to Mr. Charlie Stephens during this period of

time?

A. I don't know if it was that same

night or whether it was the next day, but

they put a 24-hour a day guard on Charlie

Stephens -- the police department did.

Q. Right.

A. I saw him every day.

Q. Was he brought into your place to eat

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1436

and drink?

A. Sure.

Q. Who paid his bills?

A. Well, what little pay I got was from

the policeman on a portion that was

paid, something like 50 some dollars for one

time. That was a very small portion of it.

Q. That was supposedly from the police

department?

A. Police Department.

Q. That they were going to --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- make sure that Charlie was taken

care of?

A. Right.

Q. Did you discuss any of these events

with Mr. Knipes who was next door to you?

A. No, sir.

Q. You never had any conversation?

A. I very rarely saw Mr. Knipes.

Q. You didn't see him at all after this?

A. No, sir.

Q. So you had no opportunity to discuss

these issues with him or with Mr. Bailey at

the Lorraine?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1437

A. No, sir.

Q. Not at all?

A. No, sir.

Q. Then you eventually closed down Jim's

Grill.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. That would have been in '71?

A. I think it was July '71.

Q. Right.

A. I'm almost sure it was.

Q. Which of the staff continued to work

with you right up until the time when you

closed?

A. The only person that I had working

for me right until I closed was Bobbi.

Q. Bobbi continued to work with you?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Right until you closed?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. What happened to Betty?

A. She left my employment and went to

work for the restaurant on the corner of Main

and Calhoun.

Q. The Arcade?

A. Yeah, Arcade.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1438

Q. She went to work down there?

A. Yes.

Q. Alda Mae, she was where?

A. She just worked for me part time.

Q. Still part time. Rosie Lee?

A. I think she had already gone before I

took over.

Q. Rosie Lee Dabney?

A. She was already gone.

Q. So Bobbi was the only one who was

there?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Lena had gone?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. When did -- did Bobbi stay right up

to the end?

A. Stayed right to the day I closed,

yes, sir.

Q. All right. After the killing, when

was the next time that you went out into that

back area?

A. I believe it was two or three days

later. They had already cleaned it up when I

went back there.

Q. You went back there and saw it

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1439

cleaned up much the same way that we've shown

in the photographs earlier?

A. Yes.

Q. It was all cleaned up?

A. Yeah.

Q. Did you know how it got cleaned up?

A. I have no idea.

Q. Do you know who cleaned it up?

A. I did not know at the time, but I

heard later that the city cleaned it up, a

city crew cleaned it up.

Q. Did you hear when that city crew

cleaned it up?

A. No, sir, I did not.

Q. When that cleaning up was going on,

you did not hear it or see it at all?

A. No, sir.

Q. Is it possible that they could have

done such a big clean up as that without you

seeing it?

A. The only way I would have known they

were out there is if I went out the back

door, which I didn't do.

Q. So it's possible all this work could

have been going on and you wouldn't have

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1440

known anything about it?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. So you remember seeing it cleaned up

a few days afterwards?

A. It was several days afterwards.

Q. That was the first time you saw it?

A. First time I went out in the back.

Q. First time you went out in the back?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. You saw it all cleaned up?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you go down to the basement that

time?

A. Yeah. That's the reason I went out

to the back, to go to the basement. I don't

remember what for.

Q. You went down there. Did you see

anything different or strange in the

basement?

A. No.

Q. It was basically the same it had been

before?

A. Yes.

(End of deposition testimony.)

MR. GARRISON: That's it. Your

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1441

Honor, that's all from the deposition.

THE COURT: All right. You

might wonder why we didn't swear him in. He

wasn't testifying for himself, he was reading

the testimony of someone else. All right.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiffs are going to forgo any additional

attempts to examine Mr. Jowers believing, on

the basis of the record that's created here,

that to all of the questions he will likely

continue to plead the Fifth Amendment.

Therefore, plaintiffs have one -- one final

witness, and that witness is Mr. Dexter Scott

King.

Now, we thought we might be deposing

Mr. Jowers, so Mr. King is just arriving in

the city about this time, so we would -- we

would propose to call him first thing this

afternoon prior to closing our case. But

Mr. Garrison has informed me that one of his

witnesses under subpoena has arrived and is

waiting in the hallway. And the plaintiffs

have no objection to Mr. Garrison calling his

first witness out of turn and -- that would

be prior to plaintiffs closing their case

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1442

if Your Honor wishes to do that at this hour.

THE COURT: All right. That's

permissible. We'll allow that. And let me

explain to you Ladies and Gentlemen of the

Jury, the defendant is going to put on one of

his witnesses, but the plaintiff has not yet

completed his proof. All right.

MR. MYERS: Your Honor, may we

approach before this witness? I want to

bring one matter to the Court's attention at

side bar.

THE COURT: All right.

(A bench conference was held at

sidebar outside the hearing of the jury.)

MR. MYERS: Your Honor, the only

request that the State has with respect to

Mr. Glankler, he is the chief investigator

for the task force. He runs undercover

operatives. And I note that there are

cameras in this courtroom. What we ask is if

the Court would order that his face not be

shown for purposes so that --

THE COURT: Mr. Glankler?

MR. MYERS: Mr. Glankler.

THE COURT: The attorney?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1443

MR. MYERS: He's not an

attorney. It's his son.

THE COURT: Oh, I see.

MR. MYERS: Yes, sir, he is the

chief investigator in the drug task force

unit.

THE COURT: Okay.

MR. PEPPER: No problem with

that, Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right. You can

just go whenever you want -- do you want them

to bring him in?

MR. MYERS: I don't know if they

have an electronic ability to scramble his

face.

THE COURT: Well, the cameras --

we can't control those other cameras.

MR. MYERS: The other question I

have of the Court is on this morning's ruling

as to objections being made.

THE COURT: Okay.

MR. MYERS: Would the State be

permitted to interpose objections for the

purpose of protecting privileges, work

product and any prosecutorial process?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1444

THE COURT: I'll rule on all

those objections as they emerge.

MR. MYERS: And the Court will

permit me to make those objections?

THE COURT: Sure.

MR. PEPPER: Are you going to be

able to get him with his face covered, or you

may need time to do that? If he's going to

take time to do that, we're running into the

afternoon now, I suggest we stay with the

regular order of things and we'll call our

last witness, and then they can put him on.

How long --

MR. GARRISON: It's going to be

rather short I think.

MR. PEPPER: I might take a

little time with him.

MR. GARRISON: He's here and

ready.

THE COURT: Do you have

something to --

MR. MYERS: I do not. I

thought -- I assumed there would be the

electronic ability to scramble.

THE COURT: He probably can

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1445

handle it. But you have these other cameras

that can't do that -- the still ones.

MR. MYERS: I believe it's in

the Court's discretion to ask that pictures

not be taken of him, and I would ask the

Court to exercise discretion in that regard.

THE COURT: I'll do that. I'll

do that. I still don't know whose present in

the courtroom.

MR. MYERS: Yes, sir, I

understand. Someone may see him who

recognizes him, but our concern is

broadcasting his picture at large.

THE COURT: I'll tell the still

cameras. And let me -- let's find out

whether or not those cameras can do it. Have

that camera man come over here, the TV man.

THE BAILIFF: Yes, sir.

THE COURT: They are concerned

about the identity of this witness over here

and want to know if there's some way that you

can obscure his face so that it won't be

recognizable.

UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: Excuse

me, Your Honor. I'm with Court TV.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1446

UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: She's the

producer.

THE COURT: They're concerned

about the safety of this next witness, if his

identity is known, and want to know if you

can obscure his face so that he won't be

recognizable.

UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: What we

can do is shoot the lawyers and -- maybe

shoot him from here down, not shoot his face,

as opposed to obscuring his face. Does that

satisfy you?

MR. MYERS: That's fine as long

as his face does not show.

UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: And we

can report his name and everything?

MR. MYERS: I believe so. Let

me just check.

THE COURT: We'll just wait.

MR. CARTER: Good afternoon,

Your Honor. My name is Robert Carter. I'm

assistant district attorney over there, and

I'm the director of the West Tennessee Drug

Task Force. Mr. Glankler is currently

assigned to our task force, and I'd like to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1447

strenuously request that his visual image not

be made public in this.

THE COURT: We've agreed to

that.

MR. CARTER: Well, if I heard it

correctly, we thought about maybe trying to

shoot from his head down. Well, I happen to

be here, and I see a number of people with

hand-held cameras. I mean, we're talking

about his life is at stake.

THE COURT: I'm going to tell

those hand-held cameras not to take

pictures.

UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: And we

can shoot just the attorneys.

MR. CARTER: That's fine.

UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: And not

shoot him at all.

MR. CARTER: It's not a matter

of us trying keep an operation going. This

is personal security for this individual.

THE COURT: We can accommodate

him.

UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: We do

this all the time. We have yet to have that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1448

problem.

MR. MYERS: I understand. And

this has been a unique situation, as you

know.

UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: We'll

watch the camera.

MR. MYERS: Thank you.

THE COURT: All right.

(The bench conference was

concluded and the following proceedings were

held in the hearing and presence of the

jury.)

MARK GLANKLER,

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Hi, Mr. Glankler. How are you today?

A. Good morning -- or good afternoon.

Q. Good afternoon. Let me ask you --

I'm not going into any great detail of your

background because I understand for security

reasons. But let me ask you, among other

things, have you investigated or conducted an

investigation over the last 24, 36 months --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1449

the investigation concerning the

assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. And would you tell His

Honor and Ladies and Gentlemen of the Jury --

A. I'm sorry. I can't hear.

Q. And would you tell His Honor and

Ladies and Gentlemen of the Jury about when

that started roughly?

A. I was appointed to begin the

investigation in December of '93.

Q. All right. Who -- was it the

District Attorney -- who appointed you to do

that?

A. The District Attorney General.

Q. All right. And tell us, how did you

go about conducting that investigation. Did

you talk to witnesses or how did you -- what

all did you do?

A. There were numbers of things to do.

And we did what was our instruction to do.

They had a plan and -- what they wanted us --

or who they wanted us to talk to or attempt

to talk to.

Q. All right, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1450

A. The beginning thing started with

trying to locate some of the original

witnesses.

Q. All right, sir. Would it be a fair

statement to say you talked to many witness?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Took affidavits or statements from

many witnesses?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. All right. And did you take the

affidavits and reports back to the District

Attorney General after you obtained those?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. All right. And after the

investigation was concluded, was there a

report then written partially by you or by

the District Attorney General as to what the

findings were based upon your investigation?

A. With all due respect, which District

Attorney? I mean, any of those --

Q. Well, I believe that -- Rodney

started after you; am I correct?

A. Yes.

Q. The present District Attorney is

Mr. Gibbons; am I correct sir?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1451

A. Yes, sir.

Q. All right. There was a report

written last year in 1998; am I correct, sir?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. How many pages does that report

contain?

A. I do not know.

Q. Did you ever see it?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you ever read it?

A. A portion of it. It's on the

internet.

Q. Did you author any of the report?

A. Beg your pardon?

Q. Were you the author of any part of

that report?

A. No, sir, I did not write the report.

Q. Was that report based upon -- I know

you had someone else that worked with you.

But was it based upon some of the affidavits

that you had taken and some of the

investigation that you uncovered in

determining what took place here?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. All right. Well, would it be fair to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1452

say that the report was as much as 40 pages?

A. Sir, I don't know. I wouldn't know.

Q. How long has it been since you read

it?

A. Quite -- quite some time.

Q. All right. You did read the report?

A. I want to say that -- yes, sir. I

mean, I've read it, but it's just been so

long, and my current reassignment to other

duties.

Q. The conclusion of the report was, as

I understand it, that --

MR. MYERS: I'm going to object

on hearsay. I mean, that's -- the report --

it's getting into out-of-court statements for

the purposes of offering them for the truth

of the matter asserted.

MR. GARRISON: I'll withdraw the

question.

Q. (BY MR. GARRISON) Let me ask you

this: Did you find anyone else that was

involved in the assassination, based upon all

the statements that you took and the

affidavits, other than James Earl Ray?

MR. MYERS: Your Honor, again,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1453

these reports are in the document. The

document speaks for itself. At this point

I'm going to renew my objection as to

competency to testify. This witness has no

personal knowledge of those facts. So that

the State doesn't waive -- and to preserve

that objection, I will raise it again at this

time.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, based

on his personal knowledge and the

investigation that he did, I think he can

certainly answer my question if he knows or

doesn't know.

MR. MYERS: Your Honor, if

you're getting into his opinion as to whether

somebody acted alone, whether somebody had

help, this gets into work product.

MR. GARRISON: Well, we had been

through that already, Your Honor. The report

has been circulated around the King family

and others, and it's generally been seen, so

it's no private thing. I think he can answer

a question as to whether or not he found

anyone else that was involved from his

investigation other than James Earl Ray.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1454

MR. MYERS: Your Honor, that's

necessarily opinion. Whether in his opinion

there was somebody involved, whether in his

opinion there wasn't somebody involved.

MR. GARRISON: I'm not asking

for his opinion. Your Honor, I'm asking what

he knows from his personal investigation. I

think he can answer yes or no.

THE COURT: You're asking him if

he has any personal knowledge of the

involvement of someone else?

Q. (BY MR. GARRISON) Based upon your

personal investigation, Mr. Glankler, did you

find anyone that told you or gave an

affidavit saying anyone was involved in the

assassination other than James Earl Ray?

MR. MYERS: I'm going to object

to the form of the question. It's asking

based on the investigation as opposed to

personal knowledge.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, I

presume if he investigated it, he has some

personal knowledge. I don't know how he can

investigate and not have knowledge of it

unless he didn't know what he was doing each

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1455

day.

THE COURT: Well, you can

rephrase the question and ask him of his

personal knowledge.

MR. GARRISON: All right.

Q. (BY MR. GARRISON) Mr. Glankler, you

had personal knowledge -- you knew what you

were doing when you took these affidavits;

did you not, sir?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you know what you were doing

then?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you know what you were seeking?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. All right. Based upon what you have

conducted in the investigation and talking to

the people you've talked to and affidavits

you've taken, did you find anyone else that

told you -- any affidavit or any information

from any source that anyone had anything to

do with the assassination except James Earl

Ray?

MR. MYERS: Again, objection.

There's hearsay called for in this and,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1456

again, it's going to opinion as opposed to

fact.

THE COURT: I'm going to allow

him to answer that one.

Q. (BY MR. GARRISON) All right. What is

your answer, Mr. Glankler?

A. No, sir.

Q. All right. Now, how many witnesses

would you say you interviewed? As much as

20, 30, 40, 50? How many?

A. Probably closer to the 40, 50 range.

Q. I'm sorry, how many?

A. I said probably closer to the 40 or

50 range. And I could be even off from that.

Q. All right.

A. This spanned five years.

Q. All right. This was over a five-year

period that you interviewed witnesses; am I

correct, sir?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. All right. Now, Mr. Glankler, did

you ever have any conversation with a

Mr. Loyd Jowers?

A. On one occasion, yes, sir, that I

recall.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1457

Q. What was the occasion for that?

A. He called me.

Q. All right. Did you record it?

A. Yes, sir, I believe I did.

Q. All right. In fact, you've shown

that to Mr. Gerald Posner and let him listen

to it, who wrote a book about it, didn't you?

A. No, sir, I did not.

Q. How did he get it in his book? He

said he listened to it. How did he get it?

A. I don't know how he got it,

Counselor. I didn't give it to him.

Q. Okay. What was the extent of the

conversation with Mr. Jowers?

A. Well, I think the crux of it was he

was --

MR. MYERS: Your Honor, I'm

going to object on hearsay as to what

Mr. Jowers may have said to this investigator

out of court. And under Rule 803 it's

classic hearsay.

MR. GARRISON: I think it

certainly goes to the heart of this case. My

client is a defendant, and I have a right to

know what statement he's taken from him and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1458

what was said.

MR. MYERS: Of course, evidence

has to be admissible even if it does go to

the heart of the case. And it falls under

hearsay and therefore, under the Rules of

Evidence, is inadmissible.

THE COURT: Are you suggesting

that it was a statement against his

interest?

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, I

don't know what it was. He claims to have a

statement from Mr. Jowers. He's been

claiming that for years. And I've never had

the privilege of it, and I think I'm entitled

to know what the conversation consisted of,

what was said.

THE COURT: Do I understand the

statement itself was not a part of the file

that you --

MR. GARRISON: No, it was never

delivered to us, and I've never had it or any

way to review it.

THE COURT: I'll allow him to

answer.

Q. (BY MR. GARRISON) Can you tell us,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1459

Mr. Glankler, the extent of the conversation

you had with Mr. Jowers? And it was about

this assassination, wasn't it?

A. First of all, it was a conversation,

not a statement.

Q. Okay.

A. He called me.

Q. And it was about the assassination,

wasn't it?

A. Well, he called me to complain, as I

tried to answer a moment ago.

Q. All right. Tell us about that.

A. It was an unexpected call. He calls,

and he's upset that we had interviewed a

number of his siblings and relatives.

Q. His relatives, all right. Go ahead.

A. And said that they had no knowledge

about any of the reports in the paper and on

television and whatnot. And he was upset

with the fact that we had gone to talk with

them.

Q. All right.

A. And I simply explained to him that

that was part of the investigative process.

I'm trying to remember what else he

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1460

mentioned. He did mention to me that he

didn't -- he didn't want me to call any more

of his relatives. Well, you know, okay. And

one of the other things he was adamant about

was about the rifle. And that he told me

that was the correct rifle.

Q. And we're talking about the one

that's over and held by the Criminal Court

Clerk right now?

A. Mr. Garrison, I asked him. If I

remember correctly, I said, are you talking

about the one that was in the bundle that was

dropped and that kind of story, and he said

yes.

Q. He said that was the rifle?

A. That's what he told me.

Q. Okay.

A. And he just wanted to reiterate that

his family members didn't have any knowledge

one way or the other. In fact, commented

that he probably would be getting in trouble

for calling. And I said, you know, your

attorney didn't want, you know, us to talk to

you. So he called me on his own is all I can

tell you. And that's really all I remember

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1461

about it.

Q. That's about the extent of the

conversation?

A. Yes, it wasn't very long.

MR. GARRISON: Okay. That's all

I have.

THE COURT: Okay, Mr. Pepper.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you, Your

Honor.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Glankler.

A. Good afternoon, sir.

Q. Mr. Glankler, this Court and Jury

have heard evidence about various aspects of

plaintiffs' case related to the assassination

of Martin Luther King and the involvement of

Mr. Jowers. Let me ask you, in the course of

your investigation, did you consider whether

the brush area behind the rooming house was

cut down?

MR. MYERS: Your Honor, I'm

going to object in terms of deliberative

process, mental impression and everything

else as we discussed -- I'm renewing my

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1462

objections that were raised in the hearing

this morning.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

Mr. Glankler conducted an investigation.

This is a critical area of the case. We're

dealing with a fact as to whether or not

something took place. His investigation

should have related to that -- that

incident. Plaintiffs simply want to know if

he investigated it and what was the result.

THE COURT: If he investigated

it?

MR. PEPPER: If in the course of

his investigation he considered that -- that

event.

THE COURT: Well, I'll sustain

the objection then.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Mr. Glankler, did you

ever interview Mr. Maynard Stiles whose

testifying --

A. I know the name, Counselor, but I

don't think I took a statement from Maynard

Stiles or interviewed him. I don't think I

did.

Q. Did you ever interview Mr. Floyd

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1463

Newsom?

A. Can you help me with what he does?

Q. Yes. He was a black fireman who was

assigned to Station Number 2.

A. I don't recall the name, Counsel.

Q. All right. Ever interview

Mr. Norville Wallace?

A. I don't recall that name either

offhand.

Q. Ever interview Captain Jerry

Williams?

A. Fireman also?

Q. Jerry Williams was a policeman. He

was a homicide detective.

A. No, sir, I don't -- I really don't

recall that name.

Q. Fair enough. Did you ever interview

Mr. Charles Hurley, a private citizen?

A. Does he have a wife named Peggy?

Q. Yes.

A. I think we did talk with a Peggy

Hurley or attempted to.

Q. Did you ever interview a Mr. Leon

Cohen?

A. Again, I just don't recall without --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1464

Q. Did you ever interview Mr. James

McCraw?

A. I believe we did. He talks with a

device?

Q. Yes, the voice box.

A. Yes, okay. I believe we did talk to

him, yes, sir.

Q. How about Mrs. Olivia Catling who has

testified --

A. I'm sorry, the last name again.

Q. Catling, C A T L I N G.

A. No, sir, that name doesn't --

Q. Did you ever interview Ambassader

Andrew Young?

A. No, sir.

Q. You didn't?

A. No, sir, not that I recall.

Q. Did you ever interview Judge Arthur

Haynes?

A. No, sir.

Q. Did you ever interview Mrs. Bobbi

Balfour?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you interview Attorney James

Lassar?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1465

A. Lassar?

Q. Lassar.

A. I don't recall.

Q. Did you ever interview Mr. Royce

Wilburn?

A. I don't recall that name either.

Q. Ever interview Mr. J.B. Hodges? He's

a former MPD patrolman.

A. I don't recall.

Q. Ever interview Reverand James Orange?

A. I know that name came up in the

investigation. I've heard it. I don't

recall having the opportunity to speak with

him. I don't think we did -- or I did

anyway.

Q. Ever interview a Portuguese

journalist who interviewed Raul's wife --

the alleged Raul's wife -- a woman named

Barbara Reis?

A. A Portuguese journalist?

Q. Yes, who was covering this case.

A. I don't recall that name.

Q. Did you ever interview Mr. Jack

Saltman?

A. Well, Mr. -- if you say

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1466

"interviewed" -- I don't know if that would

be the proper term. But he had been to our

office a number of times to give

information.

Q. Did you ever take a statement from

him?

A. A direct statement?

Q. Right.

A. No, sir, if you're talking in terms

of formal -- I don't recall taking one from

him, no, sir. I know that he came to talk to

us and was wanting to offer information about

things and --

Q. All right. Did you ever interview a

Mr. Bill Hamblin?

A. Hamblin?

Q. H A M B L I N, close friend of

Mr. McCraw's for 15 years.

A. Again, Counselor --

Q. Okay.

A. -- I really don't recall. There's so

many names. I'm trying to remember the ones

I can.

Q. I appreciate that. I appreciate

that. It's been a long investigation for you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1467

as well. Mr. J.J. Isabell?

A. Again, it's a name it seems like I've

heard. I don't believe I did.

Q. How about Mr. Carthel Weeden, did you

ever interview him?

A. Say that last name again for me.

Q. Carthel Weeden.

A. No, sir.

Q. Do you know who he is?

A. To be honest with you, I can't pull

it up right this second.

Q. He's the captain of Fire Station

Number 2. He ran the fire house --

A. Okay.

Q. -- in the approximate locality of the

killing. He was in charge of everything that

happened in that fire house.

A. Okay.

Q. Did you ever interview Reverend

Walter Fountroy?

A. No, sir.

Q. Mr. Louis Ward -- you ever interview

Mr. Louis Ward?

A. I don't recall. It's a common name,

but I don't recall his name.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1468

Q. Did you ever interview Mr. Steve

Tomkins who was a Commercial Appeal reporter?

A. I don't -- I don't know if we

interviewed him, but I recall there was an

article in the paper. I remember his

involvement. That's about the best I can do

for you on that -- or alleged involvement.

Q. All right. You ever interview a cab

driver named Jimmy Adams?

A. I don't recall that name, no, sir.

Q. Did you ever interview a former New

York Times journalist, a New York Daily News

correspondent named Earl Caldwell?

A. Earl Caldwell? Not that I recall.

Q. You never interviewed him in the

course of your investigation?

A. Beg your pardon?

Q. You never interviewed him in the

course of your investigation?

A. I just don't recall that name.

MR. PEPPER: I have no further

comments about this investigation -- no

further questions for this investigator.

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1469

Q. Mr. Glankler, you worked on

documenting this investigation on behalf of

the State of Tennessee, weren't you?

A. Yes, sir, at the instruction of the

District Attorney General.

Q. That's Mr. Barrout (phonetic) that

you started out with?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And did you ever find any witness at

all that you ever talked to that indicated

that Mr. Jowers had anything to do with the

assassination?

MR. MYERS: Again, this is

hearsay, Your Honor, and witness statements,

part of the record and speak for themselves.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, I

think I have a right to ask him if he -- of

his own personal knowledge of the

investigation what he found. It's certainly

a pertinent question.

MR. MYERS: The question of

necessity is asking him to draw conclusions

if there's -- if there's something in that

statement that would lead him to conclude

that somebody acted alone or there were

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1470

other --

MR. GARRISON: Let me ask it

another way.

Q. (BY MR. GARRISON) Mr. Glankler, of

all the people you talked to, did anyone ever

state to you that Mr. Jowers had anything to

do with the assassination?

A. Counsel --

MR. MYERS: That's hearsay, and

I'm going to object on those grounds.

THE COURT: It also is -- asks

the question of whether or not there was any

kind of selective prosecution. I'm going to

allow him to answer.

Q. (BY MR. GARRISON) Can you answer the

question, Mr. Glankler?

A. I'll try. We talked to a number of

people as you know.

Q. Yes.

A. Some people tried to support claims

of Mr. Jowers' involvement. But in the

interview process, you know, like --

especially --

MR. MYERS: Your Honor, may we

approach a minute?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1471

THE COURT: Yes.

(A bench conference was held at

sidebar outside the hearing of the jury.)

MR. MYERS: Your Honor, this is

the first time I've heard the words

"selective prosecution." I would draw the

Court's attention to United States v.

Armstrong cited in the State's memorandum

from this morning. In U.S. v. Armstrong,

before any inquiries into selective

prosecution may be made, the person

alleging -- making such allegations, number

one, make a specific allegation of it.

Number two, has come forward with credible

proof that there was indeed a selective

prosecution by showing someone else was

deserving of it.

My understanding of this was that

from the way this is cast, it was not a

matter of -- a question of selective

prosecution, it was a question of somebody

was involved or not involved. And --

THE COURT: I believe you're

right. And I believe we have ridden this

horse as much as we can anyway.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1472

MR. GARRISON: Okay.

THE COURT: I'll reverse my

ruling and sustain his objection.

MR. GARRISON: All right.

(The bench conference was

concluded and the following proceedings were

held in the hearing and presence of the

jury.)

Q. (BY MR. GARRISON) Mr. Glankler, the

report that was written had a conclusion to

it, didn't it? It had a concluding point to

the report, didn't it?

A. That being the one from the Attorney

General?

Q. At the end of the report.

A. The Attorney General did.

Q. It gave a number of witnesses that

had been interviewed and what each said.

MR. MYERS: Your Honor, that

document speaks for itself. And if it's a

document that's evidenced, I'm going to

object on those grounds.

MR. GARRISON: Well, Your Honor,

if he will produce a document, that will be

great. We'll let the jury look at it if he

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1473

will produce a document. Otherwise I think

I've got a right to ask him about a report

that he authored and investigated.

MR. MYERS: Well, Your Honor,

counsel seems to have a lot of knowledge

about a report he's never seen.

MR. GARRISON: I have seen it.

MR. MYERS: And if it has been

seen, presumably counsel ought to have a

copy, and that could be entered into

evidence. That's the best evidence as to

what this report says.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor,

unfortunately, I don't have a copy. The King

family let me read it. And he knows about

it, he helped author it, and I think I've got

a right to ask him about it.

MR. MYERS: He didn't testify

that he helped author it, Your Honor. He

said that he investigated it and others

authored it. So he's being asked to testify

as to a document he's really not competent to

testify to.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, if

counsel will agree to produce the copy of the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1474

report for us, well, that will be super, and

we'll end this right now.

THE COURT: What's the question

again?

MR. GARRISON: If he will agree

to produce a copy of the report, then that

will be fine.

THE COURT: What was the

original question?

MR. GARRISON: The original

question was: Was there an ending point to

the report?

MR. MYERS: I believe he was

asking what did the report say.

MR. GARRISON: No, I didn't. I

asked him if there was an ending part to the

report.

Q. (BY MR. GARRISON) Isn't that what I

asked you, Mr. Glankler?

A. You asked me if -- I thought you said

ending part or a conclusion or something

along that line.

THE COURT: Did the report have

a conclusion?

MR. GARRISON: Yes, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1475

THE COURT: Oh, he can answer

that.

Q. (BY MR. GARRISON) All right. Did it

have a conclusion?

A. Best I recall, I believe it does,

yes, sir.

Q. And did it conclude the fact that

Mr. Ray acted alone in this case?

MR. MYERS: Your Honor, I'm

going to object. That's hearsay. That

report is an out-of-court declarant, and

second --

THE COURT: I'll sustain the

objection.

MR. GARRISON: All right.

That's all I have.

THE COURT: Anything further?

MR. PEPPER: Nothing further.

THE COURT: Do you have

anything? Do you want to be heard?

MR. MYERS: No, Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right. You're

free to leave.

THE WITNESS: Thank you, Judge.

(Witness excused.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1476

THE COURT: I think we ought to

take our lunch break now. We'll do that and

we'll resume at 2 o'clock.

(Lunch Recess.)

THE COURT: All right.

Mr. Pepper, are you prepared to go forward?

MR. PEPPER: Yes, we are, Your

Honor.

THE COURT: All right.

MR. PEPPER: At this time

plaintiffs call their last anticipated

witness, Mr. Dexter Scott King.

DEXTER SCOTT KING

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. King.

A. Good afternoon.

Q. Thank you for being with us this

afternoon.

Would you state, please, your full

name and address for the record.

A. Dexter Scott King, 449 Auburn Avenue,

Atlanta, Georgia, 30312, which is my business

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1477

address.

Q. And what do you presently do?

A. Well, I currently serve as chairman,

president and chief executive officer of the

Martin Luther King, Jr., Center for

Nonviolent Social Change.

Q. In Atlanta, Georgia?

A. That's correct.

Q. And how long have you been in that

position?

A. Almost five years. Exactly five

years at the end of this month.

Q. Tell the Court and the jury what you

have done previously, what other activities

you have been in?

A. Well, I've worked at the King Center

for a number of years in different capacities

heading up the various programs, serving as a

special assistant to the founder, my mother,

Coretta Scott King.

Q. How old were you, Mr. King, when your

father was taken?

A. I was seven years of age.

Q. Do you recall any feelings, any

emotions or thoughts that occurred around

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1478

that time?

A. The thing I remember most is that we

were all trying to move on with our lives.

My mother was very strong and very stoic and

what I felt was a strong example. So in

retrospect, I feel like we really didn't have

an opportunity to mourn because we

transformed that experience into a triumph

over tragedy, or so we thought at that time.

Q. How long did that kind of stoicism

continue?

A. I would say literally up until the

past couple years when we first got involved

with new information and evidence regarding

my father's death.

Q. And could you describe for this Court

and jury how it was that you and the family

eventually did decide to become involved with

this issue?

A. Well, it was actually a New York

Times reporter that had reached out to my

family when James Earl Ray first went in the

hospital, when it was first reported that he

was in a coma and having liver trouble, which

I believe must have been December of 1996.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1479

I'm not -- my dates are not

necessarily accurate, but I remember it was

December. Then January, I remember vividly

because I was away on vacation after the King

holiday the latter part of January, and I was

out of the country, so I called to check my

answering service, and there was a message

from a reporter, which I didn't know at the

time, because it was just a paging service,

and the only thing there was a number, but I

called the number and essentially was told by

the reporter that they were working on a

story, that they were sorry to bother me,

they felt it might be a little awkward, but

they had gotten word from the Ray family that

they wanted to reach out to us, the King

family.

While it was awkward, they felt that

their loved one was innocent. They never

wanted to bother us in the past, but because

he was near death or having a terminal

illness, it was kind of a now-or-never

proposition. All they were really asking is

would we come and testify, would we make a

plea for a trial, not dealing with any sense

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1480

of guilt.

At that time we had not seen the

evidence. Of course, we knew of your work,

but we had not seen anything. We basically

caucused with the family, and all of us were

traveling in different places, but by phone

on a conference call we took a consensus to

find out how we should respond, and the

general feeling is that whether he is

innocent or guilty, the man deserves a trial,

a real trial, which he never received, to

hear the evidence and get information out.

I think at that point we were

resolute about that, that we were going to

make this statement. And that's what

happened. Late February, mid-February, we

held a press conference where all of the

family members were present and we

essentially said why we were making a stand,

taking a stand, in support of the trial.

From that point forward we, of

course, reached out to you, which at that

time we were presented with certain evidence

and we began to see the picture and it became

more evident that this had to come out, there

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1481

had to be a forum for information at least to

be heard.

As you know, my mother and I came to

Memphis, came here and testified in Judge

Brown's courtroom, in regards to testing the

rifle. From that point forward things

evolved. For want of a better term, there

was a snowball effect where people started

coming forward independently, just reaching

out to myself, to my family, and all kinds of

information started coming forward.

Q. It sort of opened up the gate?

A. Yes. It was really literally a flood

gate of information and people who -- I

recall one letter I read from a gentleman who

said, you know, I've been in silent sympathy

with your family for the past almost thirty

years, and it discussed their background, the

fact that they served in various capacities

in the federal government, the Central

Intelligence Agency, Federal Bureau of

Investigation, and the fact that we are on

the right track, that Ray did not do it, you

are right, stand your ground, we support you,

the fact that these things happened, it is

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1482

happening today, the way in which he was set

up, that's common protocol.

So all of these types of letters

came in. The interesting thing is we didn't

know what to believe, because we are not

investigators. We have no experience in

deciphering what is fact from fiction. But

in this instance so much information came to

the forefront that we were looking for a

forum where the, quote, experts could really

separate truth from -- you know, fact from

fiction.

Q. And what is the best forum? What did

you come to believe was the best forum for

that to take place?

A. We felt a court of law, where we

would have twelve independent jurors who

could hear information and determine for

themselves. I just felt if twelve people --

whatever decision they came up with after

hearing the information, we could live with

that. That would help to bring about closure

and resolution.

Q. Mr. King, how do you answer the

criticism that has been leveled at the family

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1483

that the family's involvement in this case at

this point in time is driven by profit or by

a concern for generating a project, a movie

project, or something of that sort to

generate money?

A. I've heard that before, and it is

appalling to me. Not to be dramatic about

it, but for anyone to insinuate or to think

that we or anyone, frankly, would try to

profit off of someone's tragedy, off the

tragedy of a loved one -- you know, the

question that would often be asked is why

now, why thirty years later? Well, I was

seven years old. What am I going to do, ask,

well, I want to know who killed my father at

seven years old?

Sure, I wanted to know, but the

thing that was so interesting is all my life,

the main question that has been asked over

and over by reporters or common folk is do

you believe James Earl Ray killed your

father?

Now, I'm thinking to myself --

almost I guess thirty years now people

continue to have asked that question,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1484

including the media, and it is ironic that

the only reason we got involved with this was

because the press beat our door down until

finally we made a statement. Our typical

posture was no comment. We just didn't deal

with it. Maybe we were in denial. Who

knows. I believe we really were trying to

move on with our lives.

So there is a bit of resentment,

because the very forces that drew us into

this are now saying, why are you doing it?

Yet you can't close Pandora's box once you

open it. It evolves. So it is the most

hurtful thing, frankly, to have to endure,

someone questioning it.

Q. How do you answer the criticism,

though, of the family has been manipulated

from the beginning of its involvement up to

the present time and even into these

proceedings here, that these proceedings are

all part of a manipulation of the family?

A. Well, that, again, is hard to hear.

I would have to say, coming from not only one

generation or let's say two parents who were

in their own right very strong individuals

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1485

who carried a mantle of leadership, to think

that somehow we could be manipulated is

really insulting, because what that is saying

is that, you know, this family was able to

make sacrifices and to contribute to

ultimately what I believe has been one of the

most important social movements in this

country and endure so much, along with

others, endure so much trauma and tragedy,

and yet somehow we all of a sudden have lost

our minds.

I mean, that doesn't -- it is not

logical. So no, we have not been

manipulated. I think we have done what most

people do when they see something in front of

them that doesn't add up. You ask the

question. Then one question leads to

another.

Certainly, as I said, this was not

something that we sought out, it ought sought

us out. I think that makes all the

difference in the world.

Q. Historically have you become aware of

what happened to your father and his

organization after he came out against the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1486

war in Vietnam on April 4, 1967?

A. Yes. He made the statement at the

Riverside Church in New York "why I oppose

the war in Vietnam." Interestingly enough,

as we've been going through this period, it

is so amazing for me that as soon as this

issue of potential involvement of the federal

government came up, all of a sudden the media

just went totally negative against the

family. I couldn't understand that.

I kept asking my mother, what is

going on? She reminded me, she said, Dexter,

your dad and I have lived through this once

already. You have to understand that when

you take a stand against the establishment,

first you will be attacked, there is an

attempt to discredit, second, to try and

character assassinate, and, third, ultimately

physical termination or assassination, in

that order.

Now, the truth of the matter is if

my father had not -- if he had stopped and

not spoken out, if he had just somehow

compromised, he would probably still be here

with us today.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1487

Q. If he remained a civil rights leader?

A. Exactly. If he had just talked about

riding in the front of the bus, being able to

sit down at lunch counters, that was not

threatening. In fact, that expanded the

economic base when there was integration.

But the minute you start talking

about redistribution of wealth and stopping a

major conflict, which also has economic

ramifications, and he understood the

injustice and the disparity of

African-American men fighting on the front

lines in a disproportionate number losing

their lives with their white comrades but yet

could not even come home and eat at the same

lunch counter with their white comrades they

just fought with in Vietnam or could not live

in the same neighborhood or any number of

things, he saw this was a major injustice and

what it was doing to the black family, the

way it was destroying families, all these

young black men being sent away and dying in

disproportionate numbers.

So to make a stand, the fact that a

lot of people, soldiers who were on leave

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1488

were hearing his message, and there was this

fear of, you know, desertion, black soldiers

saying I'm not going to fight this unjust

war, why am I here, so he was certainly seen

as a threat. Unfortunately he was not. It

was a real tragedy. As he said, there cannot

be any great disappointment where there is no

great love, I'm forcing my country to live up

to its truth. And the rest is history.

Q. Has the family suffered economically

and the King Center, the work of the

perpetuation of the legacy of Martin King,

have they suffered economically similarly to

what occurred to SCLC and your father back in

1967?

A. I would have to say yes. While it is

very hard to quantify losses in terms of

dollars and cents, I can certainly tell you

that I have seen a difference in the way we

have been dealt with by corporate supporters,

contributors, when, quote, controversy

strikes.

As you know, most businesses don't

like controversy, right, wrong or

indifferent, no one wants to be seen as

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1489

embracing something that is controversial.

And yet that is the way -- I remember doing

an interview and the reporter asked me,

aren't you concerned, it sounds so

controversial? I said, no, have you

forgotten that the man which we honor -- this

was around the King holiday celebration --

was one of the most controversial individuals

of his time.

In fact, tell me how he went from

being public enemy number one in the 1960's

to a national hero with a holiday in the

1980's. Explain that to me. Well, the point

I'm making is that he can be relegated to

I-have-a-dream land because he is not here.

Certainly in death he can be martyred and put

on a pedestal, but does America really want

to deal with what he was fighting for, what

he ultimately died for, in terms of solving

the triple evils of poverty, racism, violence

and war.

Q. Do you think the atmosphere created

by the media, which has in effect established

an icon figure, do you think that kind of

atmosphere contributes to portraying him in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1490

terms of his last years of struggle?

A. Yes. I have to believe from everyone

I spoke to who knew him intimately from

outside the family that those were some of

his most depressive years in terms of really

facing up to the fact -- as he talked about

here in Memphis, I've been to the mountain

top, I've seen the promised land -- that he

had to know that things had really gotten

bad.

He was on his way to Washington for

the Poor People's Campaign and March, which

would bring together all of these forces from

different walks of life, that this could no

longer be relegated to minority status

but Appalacian Whites, Chicano

Mexican-Americans, Native Americans,

African-Americans, all coming to the steps of

the nation's capitol to say we will not leave

here until poverty is solved.

That has not been addressed today.

And because it was not addressed then, his

voice had to be silenced. That's why we're

here, to get the truth out. My hope is that

in this process, in a court of law, we I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1491

think still have the last vestige of hope in

a democracy to have a jury, to have a forum

to get the truth out, because it is sad what

I've witnessed with the media, it is just sad

in a republic that is supposed to be

independent when there is not an independent

media on certain issues, particularly when it

comes to issues of national security where

there is this fear that the people cannot

handle it, we cannot allow this out, this

truth out.

That is so disheartening. But yet a

court of law still I believe, the judicial

process, is the last hope of allowing the

truth to come forward.

Q. In terms of the impact of the media,

have you personally experienced among close

friends of yours a reaction that has been the

result of media coverage of this case over

the last few years?

A. Yes. I mean, the past three years in

specific, since we've been actively seeking

the truth, has been probably the most

traumatic period of my life for whatever

reason. I've had to really reassess so many

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1492

things, because I was not aware of the impact

that it was having on me personally and my

family.

But I would have to say in one

incident I recall a very close friend who

grew up in Tennessee, happens to come from a

prominent family in Tennessee -- we went to

school together -- and I remember her saying

when I first got involved that James Earl Ray

is guilty, why are you all involved with

this? I kept listening to her. I just heard

it go on and on. Finally I stopped her and I

said, why do you think that? What are you

basing your facts on? She said, well, that's

what they said on the TV, that's the basis,

the news.

I stopped and I said, let me explain

something to you. I took her through this

whole scenario of how disinformation works

and how more importantly mental and

psychological warfare and brainwashing works,

that if you hear something over and over and

over again, right, wrong or indifferent or

true or false, it will become habitual and it

will automatically program you in a sense.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1493

The sad thing is that she stopped

and acknowledged it, you are right. I said,

now let me show some of the things or explain

some of the things that have been explained

to me and you make your own choice.

The thing I appreciated about your

approach to all of this, because it was very

awkward, you were representing the accused,

if you will, and as you know for many years

we were not really comfortable with even

addressing this issue, because we didn't know

anything, however, when you told me, the

thing that impressed me when we first sat

down, was you said, listen, you are the

family of the victim and you have every right

to see every shred of everything, everything,

talk to witnesses, anybody that I've had the

opportunity in my ten-year trek of work and

investigation, and you had an open-book

policy. You said, you tell me who you want

to talk to, who do you want to see, and you

judge for yourself. You didn't put any words

in my mouth. You didn't try to lead us down

any path. You just said, here, put it on the

table, look at it and make your own

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1494

judgment.

But I think there are so many people

who were so -- this is not really an issue of

logic or intellect, this is an issue of

emotion. So many people are emotionally

predisposed because of thirty years of

programing, including ourselves. We always

felt James Earl Ray may have been involved,

but we also believed there was probably

extensive involvement, but then after seeing

the evidence, it was just clear that that was

not the case.

Q. This Court and jury have heard

extensive testimony yesterday on exactly the

issue that you've just been addressing, the

power of the media, particularly the visual

media.

Let's move on. Did there come a

time after you got involved with the case and

seeking a trial that there was an opportunity

for you to meet with the defendant in this

case?

A. Yes.

Q. And in fact did you not have two

meetings with this defendant?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1495

A. Yes, I did.

Q. And was the first meeting not

attended by you and me together with

defendant's counsel and the defendant?

A. That's correct.

Q. And then you had a second meeting

with Ambassador Young and the defendant and

his counsel?

A. That's correct.

Q. The Court and jury have heard

Ambassador Young's testimony and also a

recording of that meeting that I believe you

made, was made in your presence. Would you

tell the Court and jury what you recall from

the two meetings that you had as to the

defendant as to admissions against his own

interest -- which makes it possible for you

to tell them in the courtroom -- what do you

recall defendant admitting in those meetings?

A. Well, he admitted first and foremost

that he had been contacted by Frank Liberto,

who he described the relationship with Frank

Liberto as someone who helped him out in the

past and was essentially calling in a chip or

favor and that Mr. Liberto said that he would

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1496

send over to his place, over to Jim's Grill,

a package, and in that package would be some

money. It was in a produce box, the normal

delivery that he would receive.

Subsequently, after that box was

delivered, a gentleman, he was told, would be

by to pick it up. Well, that gentleman was

described as Raul. That he would come by

and pick up the money, and then from there he

would be delivering another package, which

would be a rifle.

Now, that package was delivered I

believe the morning of April the 4th. At

that time the rifle -- he said he was told to

be at the back door at six o'clock. Well,

the rifle was going to be picked up prior to

that. I may have my details a little sketchy

in terms of timing. But the gist of it was

that he would meet or did meet a gentleman at

the back door to pick up the smoking rifle.

He described that gentleman as Earl Clark.

The next day --

Q. Just for the record, Earl Clark, a

Memphis Police Department officer?

A. Lieutenant, I believe. He said he

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1497

was clear about that because they were

hunting buddies. He knew Earl Clark very

well.

After I guess the incident, he said

he threw the slug down the commode and tried

to flush it down the commode, and essentially

that clogged up the commode, you know. I

remember that very well because he couldn't

get it to, you know, to flush basically. And

the next morning the rifle was retrieved, and

that was pretty much his recollection.

Well, actually, no, he also said

that there were people who met there,

officers he knew, from the Memphis Police as

well as what he said were government types,

which he assumed to be FBI and other

government agents, meeting in his

establishment with these officers that he

knew, that he did know from the Memphis

Police, and he interpreted those meetings as

planning meetings. So in effect his place

was being used as a staging area.

Q. Did you ask Mr. Jowers questions

throughout the course of that meeting?

A. I did. I continuously asked him was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1498

he -- you know, was there anybody else or

anything else that he was not telling me.

And my sense was that -- maybe I shouldn't

speculate here. I know I shouldn't

speculate. But my sense is that he did not

want to -- he felt uncomfortable a little

bit and a little bit embarrassed in front of

me in saying or admitting that he had

involvement in the killing of my father. I

could certainly understand that.

What I said to him is, you know, my

family is not in this for retributive

justice. We're a forgiving family. My

father was stabbed by a woman who took --

almost took his life before I was even born,

and he forgave her. So we're not in this to

put people in jail. We want the truth to

come out.

His fear, obviously, was admitting

something against his own -- you know, that

would be used against him, and yet I felt

like he wanted to get something off his

chest. I felt like he wanted to make

something right before he left this earth.

It was a little bit awkward, but I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1499

have to say that I'm glad that, you know, I

feel a sense of liberation in knowing more

about what happened, what has happened in

this tragedy. It has certainly helped to

better deal with it.

Q. Did you form the impression that he

was being truthful to you?

A. I did. I really felt that. So did

Ambassador Young. We talked about it

afterwards a few times, actually, and

compared notes.

I think that in spite of the fact --

keep in mind that this was the second meeting

with myself and Ambassador Young. The first

meeting was, of course, myself along with

you. The story was consistent. So there was

not a change between the time you and I met

with him and then subsequently when

Ambassador Young and myself met.

Q. Did you have the impression from

those two meetings that he was knowingly or

unknowingly involved in what he was doing at

the time of the assassination?

A. I felt like he was knowingly involved

but didn't fully want to admit it, or, as I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1500

said, felt uncomfortable because of the

awkwardness of who I was. But it was obvious

that he knew what was going on to me.

Q. Now, he mentioned this figure, Raul,

having picked up the money at one point in

time and delivered a weapon. Did he identify

a photo spread -- of a photo spread did he

identify a photograph of him for you?

A. Yes, he did.

Q. If we can put this up.

(Photographs displayed on an

overhead projector.)

Q. We can see the photo spread that has

been in evidence here in the Court. I don't

know if you can see it. Which of these six

individuals did he identify as Raul to you?

A. The second one down on the right in

the middle.

Q. Here?

A. Yes.

Q. This picture here?

A. That's the one.

Q. He said this was the man who

delivered the money and subsequently -- I'm

sorry, picked up --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1501

A. Picked up.

Q. He picked up the money and then

delivered the rifle?

A. Correct.

Q. Did he know anything else about this

person or say anything else that you

recall?

A. Well, he said something about, you

know, he thought Mexican or wet-back or

something, but he didn't want to -- you know,

he didn't know which nationality he was. But

he was definitely, you know, of Spanish -- he

thought of Spanish descent.

Q. Did you come away with the belief

that the fatal shot that killed your father

was fired from the bushes, the brush area,

behind the defendant's grill?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. Did he say what he did with the

murder weapon, the actual murder weapon, not

the throw-down gun, the actual murder weapon?

A. I believe he said he threw it in

the -- I'm sorry. That was another piece of

that. That someone picked it up, and I

believe he said he heard they threw it in the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1502

river. But I -- I don't remember who, the

details of who picked it up and how it got,

you know, supposedly thrown in the river.

Q. Now, Dexter, at one point in time

when the family had came out and started

asking questions, being involved in this

case, were you and the family contacted by a

former FBI man?

A. Yes, we were.

Q. Who this was officer?

A. Donald Wilson.

Q. What did Mr. Wilson tell you, discuss

with you, again, very contrary to his own

professional and personal interests?

A. Well, he told me that he had received

some evidence, actually obtained evidence

from a crime scene dealing with the white

Mustang which was alleged to have been James

Earl Ray's vehicle and said that he had

traveled to the crime scene along with a

senior agent. He was essentially kind of a

new rookie agent, if you will, and the

veteran agent had him tag along to the crime

scene.

And when he opened the door, these

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1503

pieces of paper fell out, these items that he

instinctively just picked up, retrieved and

put them in his pocket. And ultimately he

had held on to these items for quite some

time.

He said the thing that made him come

forward was he saw my mother and I on CNN,

which in this case is good to have the media

putting it out there, but he saw us

testifying in I guess Judge Brown's courtroom

and asking -- making a plea for the truth to

come out. And at that time he felt that

really moved him to resolve this after so

much time.

Q. Where did these articles, these items

that he showed you, where did he get them,

where did they actually fall from?

A. The inside of the car, the door.

When he opened the door, they just hit the

ground.

Q. This car, which car was this again?

A. This was the white Mustang that James

Earl Ray had ditched in I believe Capital

Homes, which is a housing project in Atlanta.

Q. And these pieces of paper were in an

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1504

envelope or loose and fell out of the car?

A. Correct.

Q. And he picked them up and kept them?

A. Yes, he did.

Q. Why did he hold on to them all these

years?

A. Well, he tried to give me some

history, which I thought was fairly

interesting, because it speaks to his motive,

but he talked about when he joined the Bureau

fresh out of law school here in Tennessee, I

think, where he went to school, and he saw

working for the Federal Bureau as being a way

to help with civil rights.

He really seemed to be committed to

making a difference in the cause of justice

in this country at that time. And he said

the most incredible thing happened to him

literally on his first day on the job, or

let's say his first day in training, when he

was going -- or assigned to go to the

academy.

He was assigned to a black rookie

agent, I guess they were rookie agents when

they were going through training, and they

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1505

were in Virginia, I believe it was, at a

rooming facility where they all stayed, and

when they went to check in, his black

roommate was denied admission.

He said he was just so sure that the

brass, top brass, were going to really come

down on these people, this resident manager,

if you will. And he watched the way the

situation was handled, and he said, you know,

from that day forward, I knew I made the

biggest mistake of my life.

What he was saying is that the black

agent could not room with him, that Director

Hoover and all the top brass didn't do

anything about rectifying the situation.

So -- and he said when it just

really hit him is a few years later the

agent, the black agent, was killed in the

line of duty, and at his funeral I believe in

Chicago he was talking about how the director

and everyone was there talking about how

great this guy was, and all he could remember

is when the guy really needed support, they

were nowhere to be found.

He said once he started learning

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1506

about the climate and the culture of the

Bureau and how this type of thing would

happen, he instinctively felt that if he had

turned in that evidence, his superiors would

have -- it would have ended up missing.

And I don't remember, there was

another incident, and I can't remember

whether this happened before or after the

Mustang was discovered, but he and his

agent -- I mean he and his partner happened

to see a gentleman that fit the description

of James Earl Ray somewhere in their travels,

and they radioed into headquarters to ask

what to do, whether to apprehend or to let

him go, whatever, and they were told

basically to come back immediately to

headquarters and basically sign off.

He said again from that incident he

knew that he was making the right decision,

because he really believed this could have

been the man, but they were told to not

proceed.

Q. To your personal knowledge, what has

happened to Agent Wilson since that time?

A. He has been character assassinated.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1507

He has also said that his wife has been

somewhat terrorized. Just different types of

harassment tactics have been used to silence

him, to intimidate him.

I witnessed for myself the way this

whole thing was handled in the media, and the

first knee-jerk response that came out was

that this guy was not even an FBI agent. I

watched literally the news cycle of how

within minutes first he is not an agent,

second, well, he wasn't on the crime scene

detail -- which is true technically, because

the car was impounded and taken to the garage

where it was taken a part by special agents

to go over it with a fine-tooth comb, which

he was not officially a part of that

detachment, but he was definitely on the

scene -- and ultimately there were quotes

from former FBI agents saying, well, whatever

he has is fabricated.

Now, how can you make an unilateral

statement when you haven't even seen what he

has? So it amazed me to watch how this man

was attacked for coming forward with

something. And he really believed -- the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1508

saddest thing about this whole episode is

when I met this gentleman, I could see the

sincerity. He was a man who was to me the

epitome of a do-gooder government bureaucrat

who really joined the service to do the right

thing, who wanted to serve his country, who

believed in the constitution.

And he was so shocked, I think

almost naive, because he kept saying, I want

to make sure that the Attorney General Janet

Reno gets this information personally. And I

remember thinking how, you know, maybe naive

that he was, but he believed that if he

forged ahead, that the right thing would be

done. You know, I really feel sorry for him,

to be honest with you, because I don't think

he had a clue.

Q. There were a series of articles

written by one local reporter who tried to

get this story out and they were published

and plaintiffs would like to move their

admission into evidence at this time.

(The above-mentioned documents

were marked Collective Exhibit 31.)

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) I'll put up on the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1509

screen now a document or a piece of paper.

It is not very clear, but what it is is a

telephone directory page. Have you seen that

before?

A. Yes, I have.

Q. Do you see this writing up here?

A. Yes.

Q. Can you make that out from that

distance?

A. Yes, I can.

Q. What does it say?

A. Raul.

Q. The name Raul?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you recognize this as one of

the -- poor copy though it is, and we're only

doing with a copy here, but do you recognize

this as a copy of one of the pieces of paper

that he found in the -- that fell out of the

Mustang?

A. Yes, I do.

Q. Okay. I'll put up a second photocopy

of another document he gave you, another

piece of paper. Do you recognize this piece

of paper as one that you were shown by Agent

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1510

Wilson?

A. Yes, I do.

Q. What did you make of this? What did

you think this was?

A. Payment, like a payment schedule or

list of payments made.

Q. It looked like a schedule of some

monies that were to be paid?

A. Yes.

Q. Does this appear to be some sort of

list of payments or a payment sheet?

A. Yes, correct.

Q. You said he said this also came from

the Mustang?

A. Yes, it did.

Q. This list of payments, at the bottom

of it, do you see this writing here?

A. Yes, I do.

Q. Can you make that name out?

A. I cannot. From here I cannot make it

out. It is very --

Q. It is very fuzzy, isn't it?

A. It is very fuzzy.

MR. PEPPER: Let me do this,

Your Honor. Let me make take the copy up and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1511

ask the witness to take a look at it closer.

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) Is that helpful at

all?

A. I am still having a hard time.

Q. Then you should not identify it if

you can't. That's fine.

MR. PEPPER: We will move the

admission of both of these collectively as

the next exhibit.

THE COURT: Did you identify

that as one of the documents that was shown

you to by the agent?

THE WITNESS: Yes, I did.

(Whereupon, the above-mentioned

document was marked as Exhibit 32.)

Q. (BY MR. PEPPER) At the time you met

with Agent Wilson, did you also discuss

another document that was in the car at the

time that fell out and that he retrieved at

the time?

A. Well, he talked about other

information he had obtained, but he didn't go

into detail at the time. I subsequently

found out about the other information.

Q. How did you personally come to learn

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1512

of this other piece of information?

A. I believe it was from a reporter with

the Atlanta Journal Constitution and an

article that actually he subsequently wrote

about it, about the evidence, and the fact

that the Justice Department I believe had

subpoenaed that separate -- that additional

piece of evidence.

Q. What was that additional piece of

evidence that the subpoena was issued for?

A. It was a piece of paper or a card, I

don't remember the exact instrument, but it

was paper or a card with the phone number to

the Atlanta office of the FBI.

Q. The phone number of the Atlanta

office of the FBI in James Earl Ray's

Mustang?

A. That's correct.

Q. Did there come a time, Mr. King, as a

result of all of this activity that you

decided to meet with James Earl Ray?

A. Yes.

Q. Why did you decide to take that step

and meet with the man who had been accused of

killing your father?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1513

A. Well, first and foremost I didn't

believe that he had actually pulled the

trigger at the time. My feeling was even if

he had, based on the upbringing that I have,

that I've had and my family, that it would

have been the right thing to do.

Being raised in a Judeo-Christian

home or faith to practice what you preach in

terms of forgiveness, if he didn't do it,

then I felt, which I did feel, I was there on

the grounds of this man has also suffered an

injustice, but regardless of either scenario,

somehow we both, victim/victimizer, both

victims, however you look at it, had some

type of commonality.

So for me spiritually meeting with

the accused, if you will, was important for

me to personally eye to eye meet this man and

ask him did he do it while in my heart I did

not believe that he did, but I needed to do

that for the record, if you will.

I thought about the fact that --

again, some people were really outraged.

They were upset with me, why did you meet

with him? As I said earlier, this has been

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1514

an emotional issue and not an intellectual or

logical issue, issue of logic. People just

react to what they've been conditioned to.

Again, I've had to draw on my

earliest experiences of dealing with an

assassin when my grandmother was killed in

1973 -- I'm sorry, in 1974. I was there with

my grandfather when he forgave his wife's

killer, my grandmother. And yet -- of

course, I knew about my father forgiving the

woman who stabbed him and almost took his

life.

So there was a precedent set growing

up. In our home we were always taught don't

hate white people, don't hate the person who

did this. So I didn't see it as being out of

character to meet with him.

Q. It was really a part of the family's

practice and process, wasn't it? Did you go

with your grandfather to visit your

grandmother's killer in prison?

A. Well, no. Actually, while she was on

the operating table we walked over to where

he was being kept, because there was an

altercation to apprehend him. He had to have

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1515

treatment as well. We went over to meet with

him.

My grandfather asked him why he did

it. Essentially he said, I came to get you,

and when I get out, I'm going to get you. My

grandfather simply said, son, God bless you,

and I'm going to pray for you and I'm going

to forgive you for your sins.

Of course, standing there witnessing

this at a very young age helped me to

understand what forgiveness was all about,

and having that strong spiritual foundation

and base is really what has sustained us for

all this time.

Q. So it is not just your father's

example in life and times but your

grandparents as well?

A. Yes, that's correct. When my father

was killed, I remember a lot of things that

happened, but I wasn't old enough to really

understand, you know, the whole forgiveness

concept. I do remember it was an ominous

period.

I remember us really feeling very

awkward about him coming back to Memphis that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1516

last time. For whatever reason, we felt

something was going to happen. I know I felt

that. It was very ominous. That was the

extent of it. I didn't know why.

Q. Now, did there come a time when you

progressed in your consideration of this case

and the family's quest for answers and truth

that you decided to ask the Justice

Department or the President of the United

States in the first instance to open an

investigation?

A. Yes.

Q. What has happened with respect to

that request and would you describe how it

has proceeded?

A. Yes. Well, initially we had a

meeting with President Clinton asking him to

open an investigation. At that time we were

requesting what we saw as a similar model to

South Africa's Truth & Reconciliation

Commission. We really felt if this truth was

going to come out, it had to be done in the

context of amnesty or immunity and a healing,

a cleansing, that when there are crimes

against the people, if you will, by the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1517

State, there has to be some type of process

so that people can come forward without fear

of reprisals.

So that was our first request. And

that was not granted. What he said he would

do is he would speak with the Attorney

General, Janet Reno, and ultimately she made

the decision that she would do what was

called a limited investigation, which would

focus on, quote, new evidence.

What we tried to explain to her is

that we believe that while you can refer to

the, quote, new evidence ala Donald Wilson,

ala Loyd Jowers, the old evidence, quote, was

flawed. In fact, it has not thoroughly been

reviewed.

So to pigeonhole it into this,

quote, new investigation or only focusing on

new evidence, is probably not going to serve

us because you are only going to be in effect

drawing conclusions that don't deal with the

a holistic picture.

In order to do this, and the last

time I checked, there is no statute of

limitations on murder, but the reality is

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1518

that, you know, you have to deal with

everything, and yet that request was not

granted. So we were very disappointed. But

we wanted to at least in the spirit of, you

know, reconciliation, give the powers that be

the benefit of the doubt to try and come up

with something that made sense.

We still to this day don't know

where that stands. But I can say that I'm

not optimistic, because I just -- the signs

or the things that typically would point

towards optimism have not been evident. This

is totally a gut feeling.

I noted it is customary to be silent

during an investigation until all facts are

in, but the thing that has always been ironic

to me is that if we're the victims of the

family, then everyone from the DA locally to

the Justice Department is supposed to

represent our interest, at least that's what

I thought growing up watching Perry Mason and

everything and the like, but in this instance

it seems like we have been put on the

opposite side of State, and we've, rather

than being embraced and our cause being

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1519

supported and us getting equal justice and

fighting for our rights, we've been almost

summarily dismissed.

So I don't know. I mean, I always

try to remain optimistic. I do believe there

are things bigger than all of us that can

intervene and ultimately in the end, as my

father would say, the arc of the moral

universe is long, but it bends towards

justice. To me I interpreted that as meaning

it may not come out in your lifetime, but in

time all things are revealed.

Q. But what about those who finally say

that this is important for the family and it

is important for you from a personal

standpoint that the truth be developed and it

emerge, but is it necessary for the nation,

for this Republic, to go through this siege,

this anguish, this torment again?

A. Oh, certainly. Anyone who says just

let it go, I mean, let's face it, nothing is

going to bring him back, the thing that will

certainly resolve and allow for healing,

closure and healing, is resolving it so it is

not still in this land of uncertainty.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1520

Anyone who has had a tragedy --

certainly my family is high profile, but

we're no different than any person who has

lost a loved one and just simply want to know

what happened, whether it is a car accident

or anything. I mean, you want to know how

your loved one left, if you will.

Certainly in this instance where

there was so many questions that were not

answered and this thing was put to bed so

quickly, it is always inevitably going to

come back up.

So what has been happening is that

for whatever reason there are those who have

tried to suppress it, don't want to deal with

it, because it is a can of worms, but I have

to say, like anything that has not been

resolved, it will haunt you until it is

resolved. And that's not just the victim.

It is the victimizer. It is those who

represent the victims and the victimizers,

because we are all, as my father used to say,

inextricably tied together by a garment of

destiny.

You cannot separate and say, well,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1521

that happened then, so we shouldn't deal with

it, because to me it is just like it was

yesterday. I mean, I remember what I was

doing when he was killed. I remember details

of everything. And because that has not been

resolved, I know for me personally it has

affected me in so many ways didn't even

realize until recently of thinking I had

dealt with and I really had not.

So this in a real sense from a

personal side but then from a holistic side,

in terms of the people, in terms of the

masses, yes, it has to be dealt with because

it is not about who killed Martin Luther

King, Jr., my father, it is not about

necessarily all of those details, it is about

why was he killed. Because if you answer the

why, you will understand the same things are

still happening. Until we address that,

we're all in trouble, because if it could

happen to him, certainly it can happen to --

if it can happen to this family, it can

happen to anybody.

Q. In his honor's courtroom here -- this

may be a court of last resort, Mr. King.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1522

A. That's correct.

Q. -- why should the nation, this

Republic, be concerned about the why, about

the why and the how of what happened to

Martin Luther King, Jr., aside from the

family interest, the nation, this Republic,

why is it important to know?

A. Well, it is important to know so it

will not be repeated. That's the injustice.

It should not be repeated. That if we say

we're true to our calling, as he talked about

in the "I Have a Dream" speech, about the bad

check, he talked about the importance of all

Americans coming together, black, white, it

didn't matter, but people of goodwill being

given an opportunity to have life, liberty

and the pursuit of happiness, that's what

we're all here for, and how can you have that

in a so-called democracy if the democracy, if

the State, the Republic, do not like what you

are saying and you are told from childhood

that you have freedom of speech, freedom of

press, freedom of all this, but the fact of

the matter is if what you are saying goes

against what certain people believe you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1523

should be saying, you will be dealt with,

maybe not the way you are dealt with in

China, which is over, but you will be dealt

with covertly and in some way the same

result. The result is the same.

Personally I would rather someone

tell me you have no rights, you can't speak,

than to think I have the rights and yet I'm

in mental bondage because I'm thinking I'm

free all along but there is a long leash that

the minute I say something that doesn't fit

with the elite or with the special interests,

I'm in trouble.

That is what Martin Luther King,

Jr., represented, someone who spoke for all

of us, who spoke for the least of these who

were not heard. That's why this is

important, because this really opens the

issue up of why he was taken from us in the

first place.

Q. I'd like you to address two final

issues, if you would. There has been

evidence in these proceedings that

photographs were in fact taken of the

assassination by military personnel.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1524

A. Uh-huh.

Q. They were on the roof of a fire

station, no less. In all likelihood, those

films, those photographs, of the entire event

of the assassination of your father exist

today in some archive, deeply buried,

perhaps, but in some archive of the

Pentagon.

What would you say to the Department

of Defense, to the military intelligence

structure of the United States, to the

government of the United States that controls

perhaps that photographic visual evidence of

the truth in this case, what would you ask

them to do with that information, those

photographs?

A. I think the information should

obviously, all of it, should come forth,

should be brought out. I understand why it

hasn't been.

There is fear, obviously, that if

the truth were to come out, who would -- what

would that say? I mean, really, we are

talking about, quote, a political

assassination in modern-day times, a domestic

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1525

political assassination.

Of course, it is ironic, but I was

watching a special on the CIA, and they say,

yes, we've participated in assassinations

abroad but, no, we could never do anything

like that domestically. Well, I don't know,

but what's to say, you know, whether you call

it CIA or some other innocuous acronym or

agency, killing is killing.

The issue becomes what do we do

about this? Do we endorse a policy in this

country, in this life, that says if we don't

agree with someone, the only means to deal

with it is through elimination and

termination? I think my father taught us the

opposite, that you can overcome without

violence, that there are ways, because when

you use violence, you leave residue that the

next generation will come back, and it is a

vicious cycle. You never solve the problem.

So I would say that all information,

evidence, should be -- there should be full

disclosure. To be honest, I mean, if the

family of the victim -- if you want to look

at it in terms of first right, if there is a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1526

protocol, if we're saying we can forgive and

let people off the hook, then why can't

anybody else?

I mean, if you can measure suffrage,

and technically we say, well, we suffered the

greatest loss, if you can measure it that

way -- I'm not saying you can -- but if we're

saying we're willing to forgive and

embark upon a process that allows for

reconciliation, why can't others? That's

all.

Q. This action -- finally, this action

is against Loyd Jowers as a defendant and

other unknown conspirators. If evidence

emerges at this trial in this civil courtroom

that could or should result in the

prosecution, the criminal prosecution of

other individuals, is the family interested

in pursuing criminal prosecution of others

known and unknown involved in this

assassination?

A. No. We have never been interested in

criminal prosecution. As I stated before,

this was not about and is not for us about

retributive justice. We're not in this to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1527

make heads roll.

We're in this to use the teachings

that my father taught us in terms of

nonviolent reconciliation. It works. I

mean, we're living together in the South

today because of that great movement, black

and white together, different types of

advances that have occurred as a matter of a

peaceful, nonviolent movement. We know that

it works.

So, therefore, we have to be true to

our cause. We have to practice what we

preach. So what we're saying is that we're

not looking to -- we're not looking to put

people in prison. What we're looking to do

is get the truth out so that this nation can

learn and know officially.

I frankly feel I already know the

truth. And, I mean, if the world never finds

out officially, it is never broadcast across

the world, that's a tragedy. But I can move

on with my life knowing that I now know what

happened. I believe that in my heart.

So this proceeding is almost really

technically our final legal remedy, and I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1528

think -- I know it has been long and drawn

out and the jury has had to do such a tedious

task at deciphering all of this body of

evidence, and I think -- and testimony, and I

think that that certainly has to be

considered, that there was no other way to do

it, this was a last resort, we tried

everything, we did everything humanly

possible.

We've not gained anything. We've

lost financially. We've -- I could spend

days giving you countless examples of the

agony and the defeat. And when people ask

that question, are you in it for money, what

money? People back away. Everybody I know

who has been associated with this has been --

has paid a price. You know, I don't -- it is

not a benefit.

The only benefit is that the truth

has to ultimately come out, because that's

what we all believe in. I believe we all

stand for justice and want the right thing to

happen. So ultimately as a last resort in

this proceeding, to say that we're not

looking for great remuneration, it is the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1529

total opposite, we're looking for nominal

damages, but we're looking for the truth.

And you can't put a price on the truth.

So that hopefully answers your

question.

Q. It goes a long way to it, but in

terms of Mr. Jowers, and the final issue is

an issue of damages, Mr. King, because this

is a civil action, a wrongful death action

against the defendant, and damages inevitably

raises its head, and whilst you have said

we're only interested in nominal damages,

that needs in a plea to the jury to be

spelled out with a degree of more

specificity.

What would be in your mind an

appropriate sort or type, quantity, number of

damages and for what purpose would those

damages be used if you were to ask this jury

to award damages with a number figure, what

would make sense to you and the family at

this point in time?

A. Well, the number I'm a little bit

fuzzy on because, you know, numbers are so

subjective. But let's just say for the sake

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1530

of this proceeding, let's say we were granted

a hundred dollar --

Q. Suppose the request were to be framed

in terms of a hundred dollars which would go

toward the funeral expenses of your father.

What would you do -- if that were the case

and you were given that award, what do you

think you might appropriately do with that

money?

A. I think it would only be fitting that

any sum of money, no matter how small or

large, go to benefit some cause that he would

have wanted or been associated with. Because

this is Memphis, because of what it

represents, he was here supporting the

sanitation workers for their plight, and I

would certainly support and want to see some

benefit, whether it be their welfare, the

Sanitation Workers Union Welfare Fund or

something along those lines that the family

could contribute that sum to and even, you

know, contribute more out of our pockets.

I just think that we need to bring

closure to this. It something as minimal as

the fact that even to this day I have awkward

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1531

feelings when I come here. I'm still -- it

is not any reflection of the people, because

the people are wonderful. Everybody rolls

out the red carpet, bends over backwards to

be hospitable.

But until this injustice is settled,

then all we can really do is try to deal with

what he would have done, and he was here to

support a campaign that dealt with man's

inhumanity to man, and now that we're

rounding out and coming to the end of this

journey, my hope is that this will be not an

ending but a beginning, a launching pad, so

that an example can be set here in this

courthouse in this city and in this state to

show people, to send a message that it does

not always have to be the way that people

think or what they assume, that impressions

and opinions, no matter what anybody writes

in a column or an editorial, that hopefully

people's hearts have been moved and their

heads have been dealt with and there will be

a verdict that is one of fairness and

justice.

MR. PEPPER: Mr. King. Thank

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1532

you very much.

THE COURT: Let's take a break

before cross-examination.

(Jury out.)

(Short recess.)

THE COURT: Mr. Garrison, do you

want to cross-examine the witness?

MR. GARRISON: Do you want to

bring the jury?

THE COURT: Yes. That might be

a good idea.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: All right. They

wanted to start without you all, but I told

them we can't do that.

You may proceed.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. King. How you

are today?

A. Fine. How about yourself?

Q. Fine. Thank you. Mr. King, you and

I have talked about this matter quite a few

times, haven't we?

A. Yes, we.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1533

Q. As a matter of fact, I've been to

Atlanta and I've talked to your family and

you about this, haven't we?

A. Yes, we have.

Q. When Mr. Jowers met with you

in Jackson, Tennessee, and again Little Rock,

Arkansas, with you and Ambassador Young, he

freely and voluntarily told you what he knew

about this case. He answered your questions

the best he could. Am I correct, sir?

A. Yes, he did.

Q. Mr. King, when you met the first time

with Mr. Jowers, he apologized to you for any

part he may have played in this, didn't he?

A. Yes, he did.

Q. And he also told you that he did not

know at the time that the main target was Dr.

King, he told you that, didn't he?

A. He did say that.

Q. That he had no idea that Dr. King

would be assassinated or knew anything that

was going on?

A. That's true. He did say that.

Q. I believe he also told you that he

was -- he had an agreement or had been asked

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1534

by Mr. Liberto to handle some money and he

had handled money before on other occasions

before this. Do you recall that?

A. Yes, I do.

Q. Let me ask you, Mr. King, you had

talked to Mr. Jowers and Ambassador Young,

too, about immunity for him, did you not,

sir?

A. Yes, we did.

Q. In fact, Reverend Lowery, what was

his position?

A. He was President of the Southern

Christian Leadership Conference.

Q. And he came here and spent the better

part of a day and met with Mr. Gibbons in an

effort to try to obtain immunity for Mr.

Jowers. You are aware of that, aren't you?

A. Yes, I am.

Q. And Mr. Gibbons refused?

A. That's correct.

Q. Can you tell us this: Did you ever

have any meeting with either Mr. Campbell or

Mr. Gibbons from the District Attorney's

Office?

A. Yes, I did.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1535

Q. Okay. Did they ever explain to you

as to why they were so against having this

rifle tested?

A. Yes. They basically said, and I

don't recall the exact outcome of the

conversation, but essentially they felt it

would be a waste of time, that the rifle had

been tested previously and it was

inconclusive. So why is it going to change

now?

Q. Dr. Pepper asked you a moment ago

about there had been some discussion or

some -- something in the news media about the

fact that you and your family had been

manipulated. You investigated this quite a

bit before you started this action, did you

not, sir?

A. Yes. I guess the total of

information that has come forth has just been

overwhelming.

Q. And let me ask you this, Mr. King:

Based upon all the information that has come

to you within recent years and the witnesses

that have come forth, isn't it true that you

have made the statement that you thought that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1536

from the President, who was Lyndon B.

Johnson, on down were part of this or knew

that this was going to happen?

A. Well, no, actually that statement was

taken out of context. I was asked by a

journalist or interviewer, Forrest Sawyer, to

be exact, from ABC -- I guess it was Turning

Point was the program -- whether I felt

President Johnson was involved or knew about

it, and I simply made the comment, which, of

course, got edited out, prefacing by saying

if what Bill Pepper says is true or has

written in his book is true, then I would

find it very difficult for something of this

magnitude to occur without the Commander in

Chief, in other words, if the military were

involved just based on my knowledge of

protocol and structure, the way the military

operates, then the Commander in Chief would

have to give certain orders in order to

mobilize certain forces.

Q. All right, sir.

A. But, of course, the way it was

edited, it said that I said, yes, President

Johnson was involved and knew about it. I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1537

however, did also say that the FBI -- it was

a known fact that Director Hoover had a major

beef, if you will, and certainly a hatred

towards my father and had stated publicly and

it is in fact public record that they

actually harassed him, surveilled him and did

other things to try and discredit him. That

is public record.

Q. Dr. Pepper asked you about

Mr. Wilson. Are you familiar with what has

happened to the notes that Mr. Wilson had?

A. Yes.

Q. What has happened to those notes?

A. The Justice Department has

confiscated them to try and authenticate

them. To my knowledge, I assume they are

still in the custody of the Justice

Department.

Q. As far as you know, there has been

nothing -- no test or anything that would

tend to say that these were fabricated or a

forgery. Am I correct, sir?

A. That's correct. I was actually told

by a reporter who had been in touch with the

Justice Department that they could not rule

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1538

them out, and they are trying to figure out

how to, for want of a better word, how to

classify them in order I guess to make them

either -- what I'm told inconclusive is

sometimes a way of saying not conclusive,

and, you know, it is like "inconclusive"

leaves you still in the balance, but I

believe if you can't rule it out, certainly

you can't say that it is a phony.

Q. Were you aware of the investigation

by the local District Attorney that started

back in 1993 and that they concluded in 1998,

were you aware of all of that?

A. That they started -- I'm sorry?

Q. I believe in 1993.

A. That who? Could you repeat who?

Q. The local District Attorney started

an investigation into some new allegations

and things. Are you aware of that?

A. I've been generally aware, not

specifically, in terms of the details of

that.

Q. Let me hand you a report, Mr. King,

and ask you if you have seen this before,

which was provided to the District Attorney's

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1539

Office?

A. Yes. This is the more recent

report. When you said 1993 --

Q. I think it says it started in 1993.

I think the report itself says that. A copy

was delivered to your family I believe in

Atlanta the last year in March.

A. Yes, I have seen a copy.

Q. That was provided to you.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, I'd

like to have that marked as an exhibit to his

testimony.

(The above-mentioned document

was marked Exhibit 33.)

Q. (BY MR. GARRISON) You've seen the

report and read it, haven't you, Mr. King?

A. Yes, I have. It has been quite some

time, a couple of years, since I have.

Q. Let me ask you, did you learn that

the government had sealed the records of the

investigation of your father's assassination?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you ever question any one as to

why those records were sealed?

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1540

Q. What answers did you get?

A. Well, I was told that there was

information that might be incriminating, that

could possibly incriminate government

involvement or corroborate government

involvement, and I was also told that there

may have been information fabricated, that

there was definitely information that the FBI

fabricated to try and discredit my father,

and that that information could possibly also

be included in that -- in the sealed records

as well.

Q. Mr. King, based upon what information

you have obtained over the last few years and

information that has come to you, Mr. Jowers

really played a very small part in this,

didn't he?

A. Well, it depends on what you call

"small part." I mean, certainly I would see

him as a specific conduit, if you will.

Whether he was the person -- if you are

asking me whether he was the person who

orchestrated and planned and put all the,

quote, conspiracy together, I would have to

say, no, I do not believe he was, quote, the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1541

brains behind this conspiracy.

Q. According to his discussion with you,

he was simply doing things he had done

previously for this person that he named as

Frank Liberto?

A. That's correct.

Q. And he was doing the normal things he

thought were normal in carrying out the

instructions of Frank Liberto. Am I correct,

sir?

A. Yes, you are.

Q. That's pretty much what he said?

A. That's correct.

MR. GARRISON: I believe that's

all. Thank you, Mr. King.

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Mr. King, you made your position, the

family's position, clear with respect to the

feelings about Mr. Jowers and how you would

regard him at this point and what you feel

should take place. Mr. Jowers' counsel just

asked you if Mr. Jowers advised you in the

meetings that he did not know about the

details or about the assassination and about

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1542

who the person was that to be assassinated.

And you answered yes, he did state this.

Let me ask you once again, finally,

did you believe then, do you believe now,

that Mr. Jowers was telling you the truth

with respect to that point, that he did not

know who was being assassinated?

A. No, I do not believe he was telling

me the truth at that time. I believe that --

he definitely said that he did not know, but

I don't believe that part. I think he was

telling the truth up until that point.

I just sensed -- and Ambassador

Young and I talked about that fact -- that he

seemed very uncomfortable admitting that much

knowledge to, you know, to me basically.

Q. Going that far?

A. Exactly, being the victim's family.

And I could understand why.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you,

Mr. King. Nothing further.

RECROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Mr. King, let me ask you this: He

met with you voluntarily at his own expense

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1543

and fully cooperated with you, didn't he?

A. Yes, he did. As you know, it was --

there was hesitation initially until we

finally were able to work everything out.

The fear of prosecution was always an issue.

I believe that -- I just felt that he was

getting this off his chest.

Q. All right. But the first thing he

did was apologize to you for anything that he

may have done that would have caused the

death of your father, didn't he?

A. He did.

MR. GARRISON: Thank you, sir.

THE COURT: All right. You may

stand down, sir. Thank you.

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: Does that complete

the plaintiffs' proof?

MR. PEPPER: Being our last

witness, your Honor, the plaintiffs

rest.

THE COURT: All right.

Mr. Garrison, do you want to go forward?

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, I

have some witnesses that were here earlier.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1544

I let them go until ten in the morning. I

didn't know how far we were going to

get.

THE COURT: We were prepared to

go on to midnight if necessary.

MR. GARRISON: I hope you are

joking, Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right. We'll

adjourn until ten o'clock tomorrow morning.

(Jury out.)

(The proceedings were

adjourned at 4:20 p.m.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1545

THE CIRCUIT COURT OF SHELBY COUNTY, TENNESSEE

THIRTIETH JUDICIAL DISTRICT AT MEMPHIS

_____________________________________________

CORETTA SCOTT KING, MARTIN

LUTHER KING, III, BERNICE KING,

DEXTER SCOTT KING and YOLANDA KING,

Plaintiffs,

Vs. Case No. 97242-4 T.D.

LOYD JOWERS and OTHER UNKNOWN

CO-CONSPIRATORS,

Defendants.

_____________________________________________

PROCEEDINGS

December 2, 1999

VOLUME XI

_____________________________________________

Before the Honorable James E. Swearengen,

Division 4, Judge presiding.

______________________________________________

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI,

RICHBERGER & WEATHERFORD

COURT REPORTERS

22nd Floor, One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

(901) 529-1999

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1546

- APPEARANCES -

For the Plaintiffs:

MR. WILLIAM PEPPER

Attorney at Law

575 Madison Avenue, Suite 1006

New York, New York 10022

(212) 605-0515

For the Defendant:

MR. LEWIS K. GARRISON, Sr.

Attorney at Law

100 North Main Street, Suite 1025

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

(901) 527-6445

Reported by:

MS. MARGIE J. ROUTHEAUX

Registered Professional Reporter

Daniel, Dillinger, Dominski,

Richberger & Weatherford

2200 One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1547

- INDEX -

WITNESS: PAGE NUMBER

REV. SMAUEL B. KYLES

Direct Examination

By Mr. Garrison --------------- 1551

Cross-Examination

By Mr. Pepper ----------------- 1577

Redirect Examination

By Mr. Garrison --------------- 1598

FRANK W. YOUNG

Direct Examination

By Mr. Garrison --------------- 1599

Cross-Examination

By Mr. Pepper ----------------- 1613

ELI ARKIN

Direct Examination

By Mr. Garrison --------------- 1621

Cross-Examination

By Mr. Pepper ----------------- 1635

REBECCA A. CLARK

Direct Examination

By Mr. Garrison --------------- 1641

Cross-Examination

By Mr. Pepper ----------------- 1649

JOHN DOE (By Video)

Direct Examination

By Mr. Garrison --------------- 1676

EXHIBITS

34 --------------- 1596

35 --------------- 1601

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1548

P R O C E E D I N G S

THE COURT: Mr. Garrison and

Mr. Pepper, I'd like to see you.

MR. GARRISON: Sir?

THE COURT: Come up here.

(A bench conference was held at

sidebar outside the hearing of the jury.)

THE COURT: Bring the jury out.

THE SHERIFF: Yes, sir.

(Jury In 10:25 a.m.)

THE COURT: Good morning, Ladies

and Gentlemen. Before we get started, the

Court has another matter that it has to deal

with. Mr. Campbell, would you come around,

please, sir.

THE COURT: Mr. Campbell, my

deputy had these pictures processed, and it

appears that you did take pictures of the

jurors in violation of the Court's order.

MR. CAMPBELL: I did not realize

that. It wasn't on purpose, Judge. I tried

to get Mr. King, and I guess I got everybody

from the angle I had.

THE COURT: Well, I'm hoping it

was inadvertance rather than deliberate.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1549

And, of course, I'm going to reflect that in

my judgment. But I do find that you're

violating of the order was an act of

contempt, and I'm going to impose on you a

fine in the amount of $25 which would cover

the cost of the rapid development of this

film and the cost that my deputy had to incur

in gas and time for having them developed.

MR. CAMPBELL: I understand.

I'm surprised they came out very good -- good

at all.

THE COURT: All right. You can

settle up with the deputy.

MR. CAMPBELL: Okay. I'll have

to do it later. I ran down here with no

money at all. So I'll catch you --

THE COURT: Well, we sure would

hate to have to put some handcuffs on you.

MR. CAMPBELL: Don't do that.

Don't do that. I can get it. I just got to

get to the bank. When we have a break, I'll

go out and bring it back.

THE COURT: All right. You will

do it before 12 o'clock.

MR. CAMPBELL: Yes, sir. I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1550

would like to stay for this and --

THE COURT: Well, if you

consider that more important than taking care

of this --

MR. CAMPBELL: Dr. King is more

important to me.

THE COURT: You can do it like

you want to. But at 12 o'clock it's either

paid or I'll send you --

MR. CAMPBELL: I'm going to sit

here for a while, and then I'll go out.

THE COURT: I'm not going to

advise you on it.

MR. CAMPBELL: I got you,

Judge. Thank you.

THE COURT: Mr. Garrison, are

you ready to proceed?

MR. GARRISON: Yes, Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right, you may.

MR. GARRISON: Call Reverend

Kyles.

REV. SAMUEL B. KYLES,

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

THE WITNESS: Your Honor, may I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1551

just have -- reflect for the record that I

was subpoenaed to come, not of my own free

will.

THE COURT: All right, sir. Let

the record reflect that Reverend Kyles is

here under subpoena.

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Good morning, Reverend Kyles.

A. Good morning.

Q. Let me ask you, sir, if you will tell

us your full name.

A. Samuel Billy Kyles.

Q. All right. And, Reverend Kyles,

you've been around Memphis a long time,

haven't you?

A. 40 years.

Q. And what presently do -- what do you

do presently?

A. Pastor, Monumental Baptist Church.

Q. All right, sir. And how long have

you been a pastor of that church?

A. 40 years.

Q. All right. You were here, Reverend

Kyles, during the Sanitation Strike; were

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1552

you, sir?

A. I was.

Q. All right. And did you have the

occasion during the Sanitation Strike back in

1968 to have some conversation or association

with Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.?

A. I did.

Q. Tell us, Reverend Kyles, during that

time when you first recall having any

conversation with Dr. Martin Luther King.

A. The garbage workers had been on

strike, I think in February. And I was in

Miami, Florida, with a group of ministers

from around the nation. Dr. King had called

a group of us down there. And I got the word

that the garbage workers had gone on strike.

And I said, just rather offhandedly, you may

have to come to Memphis to help us out on the

strike. I had no idea it would go that

long.

And, of course, when the strike

picked up momentum, we called and -- "we"

being a group called Community On The Move

For Equality -- called Dr. King about coming

to Memphis to make a speech for us. This was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1553

in March.

Q. Of 1968?

A. Of 1968, yes, sir. And the staff

says, well, he doesn't have time to come.

We're behind schedule on the Poor People's

Campaign. But he overruled the staff and

came because he thought that the garbage

strike was so important and was very akin to

what he was doing with the Poor People's

campaign. So that was our beginning

conversation about the strike.

Q. Let me ask you something. Back

before -- before March of 1968 had you -- had

you had some association with Dr. King? Had

the two of you been together in revivals or

preaching or anything like that?

A. We were pastors together, and we were

in the same convention. He was president of

the Congress -- or one of the vice presidents

of the Congress. But the meeting I mentioned

in Miami was a meeting that SCLC had called

of ministers of urban communities to see what

we could do about the violence and other

things happening in the community.

Q. All right, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1554

A. So we had a relationship before his

coming to Memphis.

Q. All right, sir. Now, when Dr. King

first came to Memphis -- that was in March of

'68; am I correct, sir? The first time --

during the first march that they had.

A. Yes, for a speech.

Q. And were you in his presence some

during the time when he first came here?

A. I'm sorry.

Q. Were you in his presence some of the

time --

A. Yes.

Q. -- when he first came here?

A. Yes. Each time he came I was

involved.

Q. Let me ask you, Reverend Kyles, did

you have any conversation or any meeting with

Dr. King before the first march that was held

here in Memphis?

A. Yes. That's -- he came to make the

speech -- not the Mountain Top Speech, but he

made another speech when he finally came.

That -- don't hold me to dates, I just can't

remember.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1555

Q. That's fine.

A. But I'm fairly certain it was March.

Q. All right, sir. Let me ask you, when

the march was held, there was some, I guess,

violence you call it. Were you present at

that time with Dr. King?

A. Yes, sir, I was.

Q. You were in the march?

A. I was, yes.

Q. All right. Now, when he left Memphis

to go back to Atlanta -- at that point did

you have any conversation with him about

coming back to Memphis?

A. Yes. During the march break-up, the

police had been just so vicious and so

violent. There were a number of young guys

who really started breaking out windows

during the march. And rather than isolate

them, the police just waded into the crowd

and started beating anybody just randomly. I

was not at the front of the march because I

was trying to give some direction in the

back.

And I could hear on the police radio

the officers -- I heard this -- this sound.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1556

I didn't even make it to Beale Street. I was

still on the street leading up to the

church. And I heard this noise. And I could

hear a sound, and I could hear the police

saying: Permission to break up the

march. Permission to break up the march.

The Negroes are rioting. The Negroes are

rioting.

And finally the permission was

granted. And he said, permission granted.

I'm listening to this on a police radio. And

then this wave of people started coming back

to the church. They started spraying tear

gas and just beating people randomly. My

six-year old daughter was sprayed in the eyes

with mace by some big burly policeman.

But they were quite vicious. And we

were concerned for Dr. King's safety. So we

flagged a car down. I wasn't an eye witness

to this, but this is how I'm told it

happened. They flagged a car down and went

to -- took him to the nearest motel -- hotel,

which was the Rivermont Hotel. After things

had calmed down, I finally went by the

hotel. He was lying on the bed fully dressed

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1557

and was very depressed.

Q. Is that the Rivermont Hotel?

A. Yes, the Rivermont Hotel.

Q. Yes, sir, go ahead.

A. He was very depressed. And he said,

Billy, what happened? I said, I don't know.

I don't know. He said, well, we have got to

have a peaceful march in Memphis. If we

don't have a peaceful march in Memphis, we

can't go to Washington. The Washington march

was not going to be a march. It was really a

campaign for poor people. He had -- he had

gathered poor people from the African-

American community, from Native Americans,

Appalachian, whites.

And it was not a case of going to

Washington making speeches and leaving, but

we were going to build tents and live in

Washington until this nation did something

about its poor. So he said, if we don't have

a peaceful march in Memphis, we can't go to

Washington. And so we determined that -- he

determined that he would come back.

That's how all the staff happened to

have been in Memphis at the time of the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1558

assassination because he sent the staff in to

workshop Memphis so we could have a peaceful

march.

Q. All right, sir. Now, when he came

back to Memphis, which was what, April the

3rd --

A. Yes.

Q. -- '68? Did -- were you present

when he arrived in Memphis?

A. No. I did not go -- I was -- I was

not at the airport. I was at the church. He

came from the airport to the church and had a

press conference there at Centenary United

Methodist Church where Jim Lawson was pastor.

Q. And I believe that plans were made at

some point that he and Reverend Abernathy and

some others would dine in your home that

afternoon; am I correct, sir?

A. No, that was -- not -- not that day.

The 3rd they had dinner at another place --

at another home. Usually when you're on the

road like that and you -- you're eating hotel

food all the time, it's kind of expected that

somebody locally would have a home-cooked

meal. And so someone else had it the 3rd.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1559

Q. On the 3rd. It was your home on the

4th.

A. The 4th, yes.

Q. All right. I've got my dates wrong.

So you were on the 4th. During the date now

of the 4th of April, 1968, would you tell us

what happened that day as best you recall,

what transpired between you and what you saw

Dr. King --

A. Yes. Dinner was to be served at my

home at six o'clock.

Q. 6 p.m.?

A. Yes.

Q. And what time did you first talk to

him that day or see him that day?

A. It was earlier that day. I think we

had a minister's meeting at one of the

churches, and then he went back to the

hotel -- to the motel -- the Lorraine Motel.

He went back there to conduct some meetings.

One of the things that he was really

concerned about -- and I think the last staff

meeting that he had, he got a recommitment to

non-violence from his staff.

He said, this is a non-violent

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1560

movement. And even if you don't embrace

non-violence as a philosophy, you have to

embrace it as a tactic because we're

non-violent. Now, anybody that really can't

embrace non-violence cannot be in this

movement. He was very, very clear on that.

And he was meeting during the day

with several groups including his own staff.

I went over to the motel about 4 o'clock. I

told he and Ralph that dinner was at 5

because we were already running so late.

When I got to the room, knocked on the door,

and they let me in. And I said, okay, it's

almost 5 o'clock. And they said, oh, no, we

called the house, dinner is not until 6, and

we're not in a hurry. And that gave me that

wonderful privilege of spending the last

hour, he and Abernathy and myself, in Room

306 waiting for the 5 o'clock hour -- or the

6 o'clock hour.

Q. Now, I know I've seen you talk about

this. You said you talked preacher talk

while you were there, is that --

A. Well, the night before -- the

Mountain Top Speech was so unusual, so

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1561

different than what we had heard. The

reporters were very curious as to what mood

he was in the next day and how -- had he come

off that. The Mountain Top Speech almost

didn't take place because there were thunder

storm warnings that night, and it was

thundering and lightning and raining.

And he thought there would not be

many people at the temple. So he told

Abernathy, Jesse Jackson and myself and

others to go over and have the meeting. He

would stay at the hotel and work on the Poor

People's campaign.

Well, when we got there, there

were -- the place was nearly full -- more

than half filled. And even though it was

raining and thundering and lightning, people

came. And so when Abernathy walked in and I

walked in and Jesse Jackson walked in, the

people started clapping. And Abernathy's

preacher sense told him -- he said, these

people are not clapping for us, they think

Martin is behind us. Show me a phone, let me

go call Martin. So he went and called him.

He said, man, you need to get over

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1562

here. These people have come to hear you.

And we're not -- I'm not making a speech

tonight. And so he said, if you think I need

to come, I'll come. We almost missed his

Mountain Top Speech. But he did come and --

and that night he dwelt on death more than I

had ever heard him.

He talked about the time that he was

stabbed in New York City. A woman came up to

him and said, are you Dr. King? He said

yes. And she stabbed him in the chest with a

letter opener. And he said of all the --

he's telling this at the meeting.

He said of all the greetings I got,

the most telling came from a young girl who

wrote: Dear Dr. King, I read about your

misfortune. And the paper said that the

blade was so close to your aorta that if you

had sneezed, you would have drowned in your

own blood. And she put at the bottom: I'm

glad you didn't sneeze.

And he picked up on that and did a

whole litany on I'm glad I didn't sneeze. If

I had sneezed I would have missed the march,

I would have -- he just listed all of the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1563

things he would have missed. And by that

time we were on our feet, we were crying, and

there was such passion and pathos in his

voice. I mean, we just -- we didn't know

what to do.

And he just said, I'm not fearing

any man. I may not get to the Promise Land

with you, but you -- we as a people will get

to the Promise Land. And I thought about

that. And I'm so certain that he knew he

wouldn't get there, but we couldn't stand to

hear him say, I won't get there. So he said,

I may not. He softened it for us. I may not

get there with you. And it was such a

powerful presentation.

And so the press was very curious as

to what mood he was in after that. But after

that, the next day, he was all right. I

mean, he was back doing what he needed to

do.

Q. Let me ask you this. At that point

had you been aware of threats against

Dr. King? Had you heard about it or had any

first-hand knowledge?

A. That was always the case. There were

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1564

always threats. There were always threats.

Q. How were these threats communicated,

through telephone calls, or how did they come

about?

A. I'm sure many of them were phone

calls. Some of them were written. But he --

he would say that he's not going to -- he's

not going to live in that fear. He just

wouldn't let that -- and I think part of what

that speech was about at Mason Temple was

preaching through the fear of death. He

preached it out of him. He just got it out

of him. He said, I'm just not fearing any

man. I'm not worried about anything.

And I'm not sure he knew that it was

as imminent as it was. But he -- he just

preached through it. And then -- and lived

with -- with that fear.

Q. Now tell us, Reverend Kyles, on the

day of the assassination what happened

there. Walk us through that if you can.

A. When I went to -- to get them at the

motel and told them it was time to go and

they said, no, no, no, we got another hour.

So in the room, Abernathy had washed one of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1565

those drip-dry shirts, and he couldn't button

it. So he took it off. And he said, Ralph,

you mean you're not going to wear that --

that shirt, and I washed it? He said, I

can't button it.

So he took it off. And he was

speaking very kindly about his father and

mother. Three preachers in the room really

talking. Ralph needed an Evangelist to

preach a revival in Atlanta. And Martin

said, why don't you get Kyles? And when I

was told -- I said, what date is it? And

they gave me the date. I said, well, I will

be in Columbus, Georgia, preaching for Fred

Lofton, who is now pastor here of

Metropolitan. He was in Columbus.

Martin said, wait a minute. Anybody

with good sense would rather spend a week

preaching in Atlanta than Columbus, Georgia.

So I said, does that mean I don't have good

sense? He said, I didn't say that. Hear

what I said. Anybody with good sense would

rather spend a week preaching in Atlanta.

And it was very light. And I'm so glad it

was. It was light conversation.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1566

He talked about what we were having

for dinner. And we had recently purchased a

new home. And he said, now, if we go there

and you bought a home and can't buy furniture

and -- like a friend in Atlanta. A preacher

bought a house, I won't call his name, but we

had to eat on a card table, and the kool-aid

was hot and the ham was cold. He said, if

that happens at your house, I'm going to

spread it on you. So he was in a very light

mood.

And we did that until about quarter

to six and we walked on the balcony. He

stepped on the balcony. And he was greeting

people he had not seen. And he saw Jesse and

he told Jesse -- Jesse Jackson -- you're not

dressed for dinner. He didn't have a suit on

or something. Jesse said, I didn't know a

shirt and tie was a prerequisite, I thought

an appetite was and I have that.

And he spoke to Chauncy Eskridge and

his -- his lawyer from Chicago, and we stood

together on the balcony. And someone said,

it's going to be cold tonight. Abernathy was

still in the room putting on shaving lotion.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1567

And Martin went back to the door. He didn't

go in the room. He said, Ralph, get my

coat. And he came back to the balcony and

was greeting people again.

Jesse said, this is Ben Branch who

is a musician from Chicago who grew up in

Memphis. And Jesse Jackson was having a

conversation with Martin and Ben Branch.

Martin and I stood together greeting. I

said, come on, guys, let's go. I got about

five steps and the shot rang out. I looked

back, and I saw him lying on the balcony.

One of his feet was hanging through

the railing. There was a tremendous hole in

his face. There was a bigger wound under his

shirt that we couldn't see, and there was

blood everywhere.

And I ran in the room, picked up the

phone to call an ambulance. The phone is

operator assisted. The operator had left the

switch board. She was out in the courtyard.

And when she saw that Dr. King had been shot,

she had a heart attack. And she died the

next day. She was the motel owner's wife.

And then I ran back out. The police

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1568

were coming with their guns drawn. And I

hollered to them: Call an ambulance on your

police radio. Dr. King has been shot. And

they said: Where did the shot come from?

And the picture you see of people pointing is

in response to them saying "where did the

shot come from?"

Q. Where were you at this point? Were

you up on the balcony?

A. I was still up on the balcony running

between the room and the balcony. When the

police got there, they secured the balcony.

Some people had come up, but they wouldn't

let others come up. And then we finally got

someone on the switchboard. They did call

the ambulance. I took the spread from one of

the beds in the room and covered him from his

neck down. Someone put a towel to his face.

And there was just -- just -- blood was just

everywhere.

Q. Reverend Kyles, did you know a young

gentleman named Marrell McCullough at that

point?

A. I heard his name, but I didn't know

who he was until -- I guess when this trial

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1569

started I knew who he was.

Q. That's the first time you ever heard

his name called?

A. No. I heard his name before, but I

really didn't know who he was.

Q. Well, was he up there that day when

Dr. King --

A. I'm told that he's on the

photograph. I don't know. I don't know him.

I didn't know him, so I don't know.

Q. Now, when Dr. King -- when the shot

was fired, are you still on the balcony or

were you going down the steps at that time?

A. No, I was still on the balcony.

Q. How many feet would you say you were

away from him roughly?

A. Five.

Q. Do you remember at that time which

direction you were facing?

A. The -- I was going down the right

side, so that would be north.

Q. All right. So you would have been

facing north looking toward the back, I

guess --

A. The back of the buildings on Main

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1570

Street.

Q. All right. And when you heard the

shot, did it sound like a shot? Did it sound

like a shot to you from a gun?

A. It's -- yes, it sounded like a shot.

But I really kind of thought it was a car

back-firing until I saw people ducking.

Everybody on the ground took for cover. And

then I realized it was -- it was the shot.

Q. All right, sir. And did you look

back in the direction of the bush area of the

rooming house and all -- did you look back in

that direction?

A. Yes. I did, yes.

Q. Did you see any movement of anyone in

that area at all?

A. I did not.

Q. All right. And you had a clear view

where you could see. Wasn't anything

obstructing your view since you were up on

the balcony; is that right?

A. Yes, I would have had a clear view.

I'm sure I looked in that direction, but I

guess I was in such shock I can't -- I can't

say that.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1571

Q. Reverend Kyles, you've talked to, I

know, many, many people and read many things

and had many conferences about this. Can I

ask you this, sir. Is it your opinion or has

it been your opinion that James Earl Ray

acted alone in this case?

A. Never has. The first interview I

gave after that I said I was certain that

there was a conspiracy -- that others were

involved. I thought there was enough

physical evidence to point to James Earl

Ray. But all day that day of April the 4th,

I heard on the radio and all the news casts:

Martin Luther King, Jr., is back in town to

lead a march. He's at the Lorraine Motel in

Room 306.

And I finally mentioned that to Andy

Young. I said, Andy, they're putting

Martin's room number on the radio. And he

said, yes, we need to check it. But I don't

think he ever did because he was in court

down here trying to get the injunction lifted

against the march.

And I just knew that any news person

who came into the -- into the news room and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1572

took that off the teletype would read that

copy. But somebody had to put it in there.

And that -- that was just too many details to

give in a regular news cast. So all the

interviews that I've given over the -- over

the years, I've mentioned from day 1 that I

thought more people were involved than

Mr. Ray.

Q. But you have no first-hand knowledge

of anyone else.

A. I do not.

Q. Of course you didn't see anything

else that day. Could you tell us which

direction or which -- where did the shot seem

to come from to you when you heard it? Which

direction was it from the position you were

standing in?

A. As I said, I thought it was a car

back-firing. So I looked over the -- I

looked over the railing when I saw people

ducking. That's when I realized it was a

shot. I don't know at what point -- I

don't -- I really don't know if I'm one of

the people pointing. I don't think I am. I

mean, it's just -- I was in shock. I just

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1573

really don't know.

Q. Let me ask you, Reverend Kyles --

now, you had talked to Dr. King about the

Poor People's March which was, what, planned

for later in that year?

A. Yes.

Q. And had you planned to be a part of

that campaign?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. And had Dr. King had any

feedback from anyone in the Capitol about

this march that you're aware of?

A. They did not want it to happen. It

was -- it was so dramatic. It was something

that had not been done before. If we had

gone to make speeches and come back, that

would have been okay. But when you talk

about building tents -- a tent city, which we

eventually did, and living on the mall, that

was different. That had not -- nothing like

that had been done with regard to the Civil

Rights movement. And it was a very bold

step.

And it had come to us that Martin

was not to reach Washington with the Poor

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1574

People's campaign. There was no long-range

plan for him even to come to Memphis because

the staff really didn't want him to come.

They didn't have time. But I think the order

was that he was not to reach Washington, so

it happened --

Q. Are you aware of the speech with

Senator Byrd a few days before that he made

where he was very critical of Dr. King and

indicated what would happen if the march took

place, how he would tear up the Capitol, and

how it would evolve around the world?

A. I know about that speech. I heard

that. And also there was a concern that with

as many soldiers being away at Vietnam that

if something broke out in Washington, it

would just -- it would exacerbate the whole

thing.

Q. Do you know of any security that was

around Dr. King when the assassination

occurred?

A. No, there was not. There was -- the

police were there so quickly because they

were stationed -- after the march broke up,

every fire station in the black community had

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1575

a TAC squad comprised of local police,

sheriffs, national guard and the like. And

they had tanks and that whole thing. They

had all of it. And they were just -- right

across from the motel is a fire station, and

they were there at that fire station.

Plus, we also found out that we were

under surveillance. There were policemen in

the fire house spying on us. I don't have

the facts to this, but -- I mean, the

first-hand knowledge, but I was told that the

young fellow who was assigned to do the

surveillance that day had such guilt that he

became an alcoholic, that he couldn't live

with the fact that he had spied on Dr. King.

And I don't know -- subsequently I

think he died. I don't know if he took his

life or what.

Q. Did he have the same security on this

visit that he had on previous visits from the

police department?

A. No, because the police had been so --

they had been so vicious at that march that

the committee -- the Committee On the Move --

the umbrella group that all of us worked

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1576

under called COME, Committee On the Move for

Equality, said we don't want the police

around. We just don't want them around, and

we'll deal with them later.

The security that they would have

had would have been at least two

African-American policemen that they assigned

to us at our discretion. And so it wasn't

like a large contingent or something pulled

off. It simply meant the guys who would be

with him as bodyguards. But that had

happened -- that had happened after that

terrible march break-up by the police.

Q. Let me ask you, Reverend Kyles, do

you know -- or had word reached Dr. King that

Washington didn't want him to come up to the

Capitol and have this --

A. Oh, I'm sure it had.

Q. Did you ever have a conversation with

him about it?

A. No, I didn't.

Q. After the shot was fired, the only

policemen that you saw were ones who came

running up with their guns drawn; is that

correct, sir?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1577

A. Yes, two of them -- two policemen.

Could have been three, but I think it was

two.

Q. Did you see any movement of police

cars in and around the area just down below

the balcony there?

A. No, I did not.

MR. GARRISON: That's all I

have. Thank you.

THE COURT: Mr. Pepper?

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MS. AKINS:

Q. Good morning, Reverend Kyles.

A. Good morning.

Q. You testified that it sounded like a

car back-firing. So I'm assuming that -- and

tell me if I'm wrong. I'm assuming that the

sound came more from a downward location than

an upward location; is that correct?

A. I couldn't say. That could be true.

I mean, I just thought it was -- I didn't

think it was a shot.

Q. But cars are usually on the streets

somewhere; is that correct?

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1578

Q. That's true, okay. You mentioned

that you were aware that there was some

surveillance on Dr. King's activities; is

that correct?

A. That's true.

Q. And -- now, would it surprise you if

this surveillance consisted of video or audio

surveillances? Would that surprise you any?

A. Oh, no, it would not.

Q. Okay. Would it surprise you that

every move that was made by Dr. King was

somehow being recorded?

A. No. We knew that.

Q. You knew that?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. You testified that you knew

that there was a young fellow who had -- was

part of surveillance team. Was that the

first --

A. I was told this, yes. I don't know

him for sure. I don't know him.

Q. You don't know him. But you

testified that this person had so much guilt

that he later committed suicide.

A. No. I said he later became an

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1579

alcoholic and he died. I don't know if he

committed suicide or not.

Q. Okay. I'm sorry. Now, would it

surprise you that that young fellow's name

was Richmond -- would it be Richmond? Were

you aware of his name?

A. No, I didn't know him. I mean, we

were under surveillance too. I mean, it

wasn't just the surveillance of Dr. King.

The local -- local leadership was under

constant surveillance by the local police.

As I said, they were just -- they were quite

vicious toward us.

Q. Now, the person that did that

surveillance, he was actually here in

court. He's not dead, okay?

A. Oh, okay.

Q. He was here. He came to court and he

testified. I want to give you a copy of his

report. It's Exhibit Number 22. If you

would turn to the fourth page, I believe.

Well, actually, third page, I'm sorry.

A. I'm sorry.

Q. Third page.

A. Front page?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1580

Q. Third page.

A. Third, okay.

Q. At the bottom, approximately the

sixth paragraph, it starts at -- let's go to

"at 2:05." Do you see that?

A. Mm-hum, I see it.

Q. "At 2:05 p.m. Reverend Samuel Kyles

arrived and went to Room 307, departed at

2:23 p.m. Do you -- who was in Room 307?

A. I think that room was already

occupied, I think. That's where -- I think

that's the room with the big bed where Martin

ordinarily would have stayed but I think was

occupied.

Q. What were you doing in Room 307?

A. I'm sorry.

Q. What were you doing in Room 307?

What was going on in Room 307?

A. I don't know that that's the room I

went to. It's been a good while ago. I had

a room there at the motel that we always kept

for people who -- who would come in -- VIP's

who would come in. I was one of the few

people who had an American Express card. And

I had secured a room. As it turned out, his

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1581

brother did come unannounced.

Now, whether that room was 307, I'm

not sure. It might have been a -- I think

307 was occupied by someone else, and that

was the room that -- if you go to the motel

now at the museum, you will see in 307 a

large king-size bed where Dr. King would have

ordinarily stayed, but I think somebody was

in that room. So he and Dr. Abernathy both

stayed in 306 with two beds.

Q. Okay. Now, Dorothy Cotton -- Dorothy

Cotton, do you know who she was?

A. Yes, I do.

Q. Now, that was her room, okay?

A. I don't know. I mean, I don't know

who was in that room.

Q. I'm just telling you that that was

her room --

A. Oh.

Q. -- maybe to refresh your memory as to

what you were doing --

A. Okay.

Q. -- in Room 307 at that time.

A. I don't remember going -- I don't

know if -- I didn't go to that room. I don't

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1582

know -- I don't recall going to that room.

Q. Okay. I understand. It was a long

time ago. That's fine. It says you arrived

at 2:05 and you left at 2:23. Do you

remember -- whatever room you went to whether

it -- do you remember what -- where did you

go at 2:23?

A. I don't recall at all really. I

really don't. I don't know if he got the

room numbers mixed up. I know there was some

conversation about my not having gone in 306

at all.

Q. And that's not what I'm talking about

now. I'm talking about earlier in the --

before the shooting, we're talking at 2

o'clock.

A. Quite frankly, I don't remember going

to that room.

Q. Okay. Can you turn to the next

page. Let's start from "at approximately

5:50." It's at the very top of that. Do you

see that?

A. Yes.

Q. Would you read that?

A. "At approximately 5:50, John B.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1583

Smith, Milton Black, Charles Cabbage and one

female colored and approximately six or seven

more of the Invaders opened the door of their

room, and I could see them gathering their

belongings. They then brought them

downstairs and placed them in the trunk of a

light blue Mustang, license BF3-750. And

they left the motel area going to meet --

going west on Butler to Main.

"Immediately after the Invaders

left, the Reverend Samuel Kyles came out of

Room 312 and went to the room where Martin

Luther King was living. He knocked on the

door and Martin came to the door. They said

a few words between each other, and the

Reverend Martin Luther King went back into

the room closing the door behind him, and the

Reverend Kyles remained on the porch."

Q. Now, this is the written statement

that was recorded on -- on that day saying

that you arrived -- you went to Dr. King's

room at 5 -- some time after 5:50, okay. Yet

you testified that you had been there one

hour earlier.

A. That's true.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1584

Q. Okay. So you're saying that this

report is not correct?

A. I am.

Q. Okay. You also have testified that

James -- at the James Earl Ray hearing; is

that not correct?

A. I have.

Q. And on that day you said that you had

been there for an hour.

A. Yes.

Q. Isn't it true that you've gotten much

notoriety out of wearing that title as being

one of the people -- one of the few people

who were with King the last hour of his death

(sic)?

A. No, I have not.

Q. Isn't it true that people have

wanted -- old women have wanted to just come

and shake your hand just because you were

there? Yes? No? Yes? No?

A. When I said to my audiences that it

was a wonderful privilege for me to have

spent the last hour of Martin's life on

earth, I did that because there is such

interest in his life. And I had to wonder

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1585

for a very long time: Why was I there?

Q. But it was interest in his life; is

that not correct?

A. Why -- that's right, in his life.

Why was I there?

Q. You --

A. And I didn't quite finish.

THE COURT: You may finish.

Q. (BY MS. AKINS) Go ahead.

A. It took some time for the revelation

to come. I had some feelings I couldn't even

express. It took a good while. I said, if

he hadn't been going to my home, would he

have been killed? If he hadn't have been

coming to Memphis, would he have been

killed? And then God revealed to me why I

was there. I was there to be a witness. And

my witness is that his life was so wonderful

and so full. That he didn't die in some

foolish way. He didn't die overdosing or a

jealous lover's gun, but he died helping

garbage workers.

And so as I share that story with

people, they will come up and shake my hand.

They will say, may I shake your hand because

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1586

you knew Dr. King. I've sought no notoriety

out of this. And I just -- I think I know

where that came from. I'm sorry.

Q. Okay. That's -- since you were so

adamant about finishing your statement, let's

go back to my question. What is the answer

to the question?

A. Have I received notoriety from --

Q. Well, actually --

A. -- from Dr. King's death?

Q. No, that's the one you answered. The

one you didn't answer was: Wasn't it true

that women -- old women have just wanted to

come and just shake your hand because of the

fact that you were present?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. That's all I asked. You were

one of the organizers or the planners of the

30th anniversary celebration of Dr. King; is

that not correct?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. And that was a big event here

in Memphis?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. And was that event

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1587

city-funded? Did you get private donations?

How did that come about?

A. Private donations.

Q. I want to -- it's going to take him

some time to get that warmed up. When you

testified earlier, you testified about how

Dr. King -- I think you said that the night

before his speech dealt -- kind of dealt with

death -- was on the topic of death. Is that

correct?

A. I said he dealt with the whole

question of the fear of death.

Q. And is it your opinion that you think

he might have had some type of premonition or

that he --

A. Oh, yes, he did.

Q. That he knew that something -- didn't

know when, but just knew --

A. He always said he would never live to

be forty. Not that he didn't want to, he

just thought he never would.

Q. Okay. I'm going to show you a

video.

(Whereupon said video was played

for the Court and Jury.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1588

Reverend Kyles: "And so we will

be gathering in Memphis April 3rd through

5th. And we planned a number of activities.

Some of the activities are geared especially

for the young who did not have a chance to --

to get the feel to know what the Civil Rights

Movement actually was about. Even as they

marched, now they could have stopped in a

hotel. But when you think about marching

from Memphis to Jackson or Jackson to

Memphis, there weren't hotels.

"You stayed in churches. You

stayed in people's homes. And -- and that's

how we got over. That's how we got through.

The struggle was a very -- was a spiritual

struggle. You couldn't pay people to do what

we had to do. You couldn't pay people to

stand before mad dogs and fire hoses and

billy clubs and cattle prods. It was

strictly a spiritual and moral movement.

"So we wanted that dimension to be

in the pilgrimage to Memphis. We will

revisit the Mountain Top Speech site. That's

the Mason's Temple where Dr. King made his

last address. Which he almost didn't make

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1589

because the night that we were having that

rally, there were tornado warnings, that he

was behind on the Poor People's campaign.

"And he said, you guys go on over

and have the rally. I'm going to stay at the

motel and work on the Poor People's

campaign. When we got there and

Dr. Abernathy walked in and Jesse Jackson

walked in and I walked in and others, people

started clapping because they thought Martin

was behind us. And so Ralph's preacher sense

said to him, this is not our crowd. And he

went to the phone and called Dr. King.

"And any of the marches that --

that -- that we had in those days, you had

the opportunity to bring the children and

bring the family and march with us. And when

I finished sharing with them the last hour of

Dr. King's life ... but that gave me the

wonderful privilege of spending the last hour

on earth. Three preachers in a room --

Abernathy, King and Kyles. And we spent that

last hour together in Room 306 at the

Lorraine Motel.

"The press is always curious and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1590

writers -- what went on? What did you talk

about? I say, we just talked preacher talk.

What preachers talk about when they get

together, revivals and all the like. About a

quarter of six we walked on the balcony, and

he was talking to people in the courtyard.

He stood here, and I stood there. Only as I

moved away so he could have a clear shot, the

shot rang out.

"I turned around and it had knocked

him back on the balcony. This tremendous

hole was in his face, and all of this was

torn out under his shirt. We couldn't see

that. The bullet mushroomed and tore all of

his insides out. He was bleeding profusely.

I ran in the room, picked up the phone and

tried to get the operator. The phone was

operator-assisted.

"I said, answer the phone, answer

the phone. And no one answered the phone

because the operator left the phone --

switchboard and came out in the courtyard.

When she saw what happened, she had a heart

attack on the spot. So there was no one on

the phone. I came back out and hollered to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1591

the police: Call an ambulance on your police

radio. They were coming with their guns

drawn saying, where did the shot come from?

The picture you see pointing is in answer to

the police saying, "Where did the shot come

from?" And the point is in the direction of

the rooming house.

"And, of course, he finally came --

the ambulance finally came. I kept shaking

my head trying to wake up because I thought I

was having a nightmare. But I was -- I was

not having a nightmare. It was real. I took

the spread from bed and covered him from his

neck down. Somebody put a towel to his

face. And I had to wonder, Reverend

Campbell, a long time, of all the places I

could have been, all the places that Martin

could have been, why was I there, why was it

at that moment?

"And I had to find out, through

living, God revealed to me that I was there

to be a witness -- a witness that Martin

Luther King, Jr., didn't die in some foolish

way. He didn't O.D. He wasn't robbing

somebody, wasn't running from the scene of a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1592

crime. But he came to Memphis to help

garbage workers -- the least of these. And

so we commemorate the life and times.

"I started telling you about the

Louisville trip. 80-year old lady came up on

the stage. I said, no, ma'am, I'll come down

there. She says, no, I want to come up. 30

years later she came up. And she was shaking

with her program in her hand. And she said,

I have never in my life -- I'm 87 years old.

I have never asked the mayor for an

autograph. But because you had your hand in

Dr. King's hand, I want your autograph. 30

years later.

"And so we commemorate this great

American. Join us in Memphis, April 3rd

through 5th. The first SCLC meeting after

Dr. King's death was in Room 306. Reverend

Jim Orange was right there in that meeting.

Thank you again, Mr. Mayor, we appreciate

what you're doing" --

The Mayor: "Thank you, sir."

Rev. Kyles: -- "in support of all

these people who are here."

(End of videotape portion.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1593

Q. (BY MS. AKINS) Now, that was you at

the 30th anniversary of -- well, discussing

the 30th anniversary.

A. That's correct.

Q. And in that you again stated that you

were -- had been with King the last hour of

his death (sic); is that correct?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, can you tell us any reason why

Lieutenant Richmond would want to lie about

the whereabouts -- what you was doing at that

time?

A. I just think he made a mistake. I

think the whole idea of him spying was

just -- he just -- it was too much for him.

If that's the young man you're talking

about. I don't know him. I never met him.

But I was -- I was -- the information just

came to me. I just think he was in error. I

think he was newly on the force too at that

time.

Q. So you think he was in error when he

said that you arrived at 2:05, left at 2:30,

then subsequently arrived and went to Room

312, then left Room 312 at 10 after 5 -- all

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1594

of the activities involving you he made a

mistake on?

A. He could have made it on others too,

I don't know. I'm not -- I'm really not

following what we're trying to do here. I

mean, I don't know. I came as a witness for

this man because I was subpoenaed. Now it

sounds like I'm on trial or something. I

don't understand this.

Q. Reverend Kyles, I represent the

plaintiff, and this is cross-examination

time. That's what I'm doing, okay. Just

bear with me. I only have just really one

more question to ask you. And --

concerning -- well, actually, I guess two

more. You've heard the tape and your account

of the events. What is your feeling about

that?

A. I'm sorry.

Q. You've heard the tape and your

recount -- or your account of the events that

occurred.

A. The amazing thing to me again is that

people are so interested in his life 30 years

after his death. If that gives me notoriety

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1595

because I share that -- they want to hear

it. I mean, I don't -- I don't know what --

I don't know what to say.

Q. No. I mean, what is your opinion

concerning the tape? That was you.

A. Yes, I was in Jackson, Mississippi.

The mayor gave me a proclamation to bring

back to Memphis because he couldn't come to

the -- to the -- to the affair. It was the

30th celebration -- 30-year celebration of

the assassination of Dr. King.

And I shared that information at a

press conference on the steps of the

mayor's -- of City Hall in Jackson,

Mississippi.

Q. And that was the recording of -- that

occurred in Jackson?

A. Yes.

MS. AKINS: Okay. Your Honor, I

would like to move this as -- into

evidence, the video tape.

THE COURT: Any objection?

MS. AKINS: Now, one more

question.

MR. GARRISON: The report of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1596

Officer Richmond?

THE COURT: No, the tape.

MR. GARRISON: I don't have any

objection.

THE COURT: All right.

(Whereupon said videotape was

marked as Exhibit Number 34.)

Q. (BY MS. AKINS) When you gave an

account of what occurred, you mentioned

"he." And I want to know who "he" was. Can

you replay that section, please.

(Whereupon a portion of the

videotape was replayed for the Court and

Jury.)

Rev. Kyles: "What preachers

talk about when they get together, revivals

and all the like. About a quarter of 6 we

walked on the balcony, and he was talking to

people in the courtyard. He stood here and I

stood there. Only as I moved away so he

could have a clear shot, the shot rang out."

(End of videotape portion.)

Q. (BY MS. AKINS) Who was "he"? You

said, "only as I moved away, so he could have

a clear shot." And I want to know who "he"

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1597

was. Who was the person that you moved away

to give him a clear shot?

A. In the conversation I was talking

about James Earl Ray.

Q. Okay. One second. Just to make sure

there's no confusion, you moved away so James

Earl Ray could get a clear shot?

A. Only as I moved away. I don't think

he wanted to risk shooting the wrong person,

whoever shot him.

Q. Okay.

A. And since we both were standing

there, we're both African-American men, he

wanted to be sure that he hit the right --

the problem we had, we thought if he had kept

shooting he could wipe out the whole staff

because they were all exposed -- all of us

were exposed.

Q. So you're moving away so that he

could --

A. My moving away had to do with going

to get in the car to go to my house for

dinner. That's what my moving away had to do

with.

MS. AKINS: Okay. I have no

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1598

further questions.

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Reverend Kyles, let me ask you this,

sir. In referring to this statement that was

just seen, you said, "so he could get a

shot." You're referring to James Earl Ray,

that was your --

A. Yes.

Q. -- thinking, wasn't it?

A. That's who I was referring to, yes.

MR. GARRISON: That's all.

Thank you, sir.

THE COURT: Anything further?

All right. Reverend Kyles, you may stand

down, and you can remain in the courtroom or

you're free to leave.

THE WITNESS: Thank you.

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: Let's take a short

break.

(Brief break taken.)

THE COURT: Mr. Garrison, are

you ready?

MR. GARRISON: Yes, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1599

THE COURT: Bring the jury.

THE SHERIFF: Yes, sir.

(Jury in 11:48 a.m.)

THE COURT: Mr. Campbell.

MR. CAMPBELL: Yes, sir.

THE COURT: Did you give him

those other pictures?

THE SHERIFF: I'm going to do

it.

THE COURT: All right. We're

ready to proceed.

MR. GARRISON: Call Mr. Warren

Young.

FRANK WARREN YOUNG,

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Tell us your full name, please, sir.

A. It's Frank Warren Young.

Q. And, Mr. Young, where are you

employed, sir?

A. Shelby County Criminal Clerks's

Office.

Q. Mr. William Key, who was here

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1600

earlier, is a criminal court clerk?

A. Yes, sir, he is.

Q. And you work in that office?

A. I do, yes, sir.

Q. Pursuant to a subpoena did you bring

certain records to the court today?

A. Yes, sir, I did.

Q. And would you explain to the Court

and the Jury what those records consist of.

A. It's a transcript of Mr. Ray's guilty

plea that was entered in Judge Battle's court

on March the 10th, 1969.

Q. All right, sir. And I provided with

you a copy. And would you tell His Honor and

Ladies and Gentlemen of the Jury if the copy

I provided you -- is it a replica, a direct

copy, of the one that what you have in the

Court.

A. I've looked at it and, yes, sir, it

is.

MR. GARRISON: I'd like to have

that marked as an exhibit to his testimony at

this time.

THE COURT: Any objection?

MR. PEPPER: No objection.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1601

(Whereupon said document was

marked as Trial Exhibit Number 35.)

Q. (BY MR. GARRISON) Mr. Young -- just

hand it back to him. Do you have a copy --

it says "Petition For Waiver Of Trial And

Request For Acceptance Of Plea Of Guilty."

Do you have that copy, sir?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And that's signed by you. It has the

signature of the defendant, James Earl Ray.

All right, sir. Now, let me ask you if you

will turn over then to the part that says

"Voir Dire Of Defendant On Waiver And Order."

Do you see that?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Would you read what you see there and

down there through the next page and the end

of the first three pages?

A. I will. Yes, sir. This is Judge

Battle: "James Earl Ray, stand. Have your

lawyers explained all your rights to you and

do you understand that?"

The defendant answered: "Yes."

Judge Battle: "Do you know that you

have a right to a trial by jury on the charge

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1602

of Murder in the First Degree against you,

the punishment for Murder in the First Degree

ranging from death by electrocution to any

time over 20 years? The burden of proof is

on the State of Tennessee to prove you guilty

beyond a reasonable doubt and to a moral

certainty, and the decision of the Jury must

be unanimous both as to guilt and

punishment.

"In the event of a jury's verdict

against you, you would have the right to file

a Motion for a New Trial addressed to the

trial judge. In the event of an adverse

ruling against you on your Motion for a New

Trial, you would have the right to successive

appeals to the Tennessee Court of Criminal

Appeals and the Supreme Court of Tennessee

and to file a petition for review by the

Supreme Court of the United States. Do you

understand that you have all these rights?"

The defendant answered: "Yes."

Judge Battle: "You are entering a

plea of Guilty to Murder in the First Degree

as charged in the Indictment and are

compromising and settling your case on agreed

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1603

punishment of ninety-nine years in the State

Penitentiary. Is this what you want to do?"

Defendant answered: "Yes."

Judge Battle: "Do you understand

that you are waiving, which means `giving

up,' a formal trial by your Plea of Guilty

although the laws of this State require the

prosecution to present certain evidence to a

jury in all cases of Pleas of Guilty to

Murder in the First Degree?

"By your plea of guilty, you're

also waiving your rights to (1) Motion for a

New Trial; (2) Successive Appeals to the

Supreme Court of Criminal Appeals and the

Supreme Court of Tennessee; (3) Petition for

Review by the Supreme Court of the United

States.

"By your plea of guilty, you are

also abandoning and waiving your objections

and exceptions to all the Motions and

Petitions in which the Court has heretofore

ruled against you in whole or in part, among

them being:

"1. Motion to withdraw a plea and

quash indictment.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1604

2. Motion to inspect evidence

3. Motion to remove lights and

cameras from jail

4. Motion for private consultation

with attorney

5. Petition to authorize defendant

to take depositions

6. Motion to permit conference with

Huie

7. Motion to permit photographs

8. Motion to designate court

reporters

9. Motion to stipulate testimony.

10. Suggestion of proper name."

The defendant answered: "Yes."

Judge Battle: "Has anything besides

this sentence of ninety-nine years in the

penitentiary been promised to you to get you

to plead guilty? Has anything else been

promised to you by anyone?"

The defendant answered: "No."

Judge Battle: "Has any pressure of

any kind by anyone in any way been used on

you to get you to plead guilty?"

Defendant answered: "No."

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1605

Judge Battle: "Are you pleading

guilty to Murder in the First Degree in this

case because you killed Dr. Martin Luther

King under such circumstances that would make

you legally guilty of Murder in the First

Degree under the law as explained to you by

your lawyers?"

The defendant answered: "Yes."

Judge Battle: "Is this the Plea of

Guilty to Murder in the First Degree with

agreed punishment of ninety-nine years in the

State Penitentiary, freely, voluntarily and

understandingly made and entered by you?"

The defendant answered: "Yes."

Judge Battle: "Is this plea of

guilty on your part the free act of your free

will, made with your full knowledge and

understanding of its meaning and

consequences?"

The defendant answered: "Yes."

Judge Battle said: "You may be

seated."

Q. (BY MR. GARRISON) Then would you turn

over to Page 1 of the transcript and down

where it says "this is a compromise and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1606

settlement," would you start reading there.

A. Where I had previously read?

Q. On Page 1 of the transcript.

A. Oh, yes, sir. "James Earl Ray,

Guilty Plea," it's entitled, Monday, March

10, 1969.

The Court: "The calendar has been

transferred to Division 1. All right. I

believe the only matter we have pending

before us is the matter of James Earl Ray."

Mr. Foreman: "Would Your Honor give

me just a minute?"

The Court: "Yes, sir."

Mr. Foreman: "May it please the

Court, in this cause we have prepared the

defendant, and I have" --

Q. Signed.

A. -- "signed and Mr. Hugh Stanton, Sr.

and Jr. will now sign a Petition for Waiver

of Trial and Request for Acceptance of Plea

of Guilty. We have an order. I believe the

Clerk has this."

The Court: "This is a compromise

and settlement on a plea of guilty to murder

in the first degree and an agreed settlement

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1607

of 99 years in the penitentiary; is that

true?"

Mr. Foreman: "That's the agreement,

Your Honor."

The Court: "Is that the agreement?

All right. I'll have to voir dire Mr. Ray.

James Earl Ray, stand. Have you" --

Q. That's "a lawyer."

A. "Have you a lawyer to explain all

your rights to you and do you understand

them?"

Answer: "Yes, sir."

The Court: "Do you know that you

have a right to a trial by jury on a charge

of Murder in the First Degree against you,

the punishment for Murder in the First Degree

ranging from death by electrocution to any

time over 20 years? The burden of proof is

on the State of Tennessee to prove you guilty

beyond a reasonable doubt and to a moral

certainty. And the decision of the jury must

be unanimous, both as to guilt and

punishment. In the event of a jury verdict

against you, you would have the right to file

a Motion for a New Trial addressed to the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1608

Trial Judge.

"In the event of an adverse ruling

against you on your Motion for a New Trial,

you would have the right to successive

appeals to the Tennessee Court of Criminal

Appeals and the Supreme Court of Tennessee

and to file a Petition for Review by the

Supreme Court of the United States. Do you

understand that you have all these rights?"

Answer: "Yes, sir."

The Court: "You're entering a Plea

of Guilty to Murder in the First Degree as

charged in the indictment and are

compromising and settling your case on an

agreed punishment of 99 years in the State

Penitentiary. Is this what you want to do?"

Answer: "Yes, I do."

The Court: "Is this what you want

to do?"

Answer: "Yes, sir."

The Court: "Do you understand you

are waiving, which means giving up, a formal

trial by your Plea of Guilty although the

laws of this State require the prosecution to

present certain evidence to a jury in all

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1609

cases on pleas of guilty to Murder in the

First Degree? By your plea of guilty, you

are also waiving your right to: (1) Your

Motion for a New Trial; (2) Successive

appeals to the Supreme Court, to the

Tennessee Court of Criminal Appeals and the

Supreme Court of Tennessee; and (3) Petition

to Review by the Supreme Court of the United

States. By your plea of guilty, you are also

abandoning and waiving your objections and

exceptions to all the motions and petitions

in which the Court has heretofore ruled

against you in whole or in part.

"Among them being: (1) Motion to

Withdraw Plea and Quash Indictment; (2)

Motion to Inspect the Evidence; (3) Motion to

Remove Lights and Cameras from the Jail; (4)

Motion for Private Consultation with

Attorney; (5) Petition to Authorize Defendant

to take Depositions; (6) Motion to Permit

Conference with Huie; (7) Motion to Permit

Photographs; (8) Motion to Designate Court

Reporter; (9) Motion to Stipulate Testimony;

(10) Suggestion of Proper Name.

"You are waiving or giving up all

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1610

these rights. Has anything besides this

sentence of 99 years in the State

penitentiary been promised to you to get you

to plead guilty? Has anything else been

promised to you by anyone?"

Answer: "No, it has not."

The Court: "Has any pressure of any

kind by anyone in any way been used on you to

get you to plead guilty?"

Answer: "Now, what did you say?"

The Court: "Are you pleading guilty

to Murder in the First Degree in this case

because you killed Dr. Martin Luther King

under such circumstances that it would make

you legally guilty of Murder in the First

Degree under the law as explained to you by

your lawyers?"

Answer: "Yes. Legally, yes."

The Court: "Is this Plea of Guilty

to Murder in the First Degree with an agreed

punishment of 99 years in the State

Penitentiary freely, voluntarily and

understandingly made and entered by you?"

Answer: "Yes, sir."

The Court: "Is this plea of guilty

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1611

on your part the free act of your free will

made with your full knowledge and

understanding of its meaning and

consequences?"

Answer: "Yes, sir."

The Court: "You may be seated. All

right. Are you ready for a jury?"

Q. (BY MR. GARRISON) Would you turn now

to Page 9 and read beginning with the

first -- second -- "I just want to make one

more statement."

A. Yes, sir. "I just want to make one

more statement to you gentlemen" --

Q. Let me ask you first of all, who is

it doing -- doing the --

A. This is General Philip Canale, Jr.

Q. All right.

A. Who was the District Attorney General

at the time. "I just want to make one more

statement to you gentlemen before we proceed

in this matter. There have -- actually, in

any case, there have been rumors going all

around, perhaps some of you have heard them,

that Mr. James Earl Ray was a dupe in this

thing or a fall guy or a member of a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1612

conspiracy to kill Dr. Martin Luther King,

Jr.

"I want to state to you as your

Attorney General that we have no proof other

than that Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., was

killed by James Earl Ray and James Earl Ray

alone, not in concert with anyone else.

"Our office has examined over 5,000

printed pages of investigation work done by

local police, by national police

organizations and by international law

enforcement agencies. We have examined over

300 physical bits of evidence, physical

exhibits. Three men in my office, Mr. Duire,

Mr. Beasley and Mr. John Carlisle, the Chief

Investigator of the Attorney General's

Office -- you can't see him over here -- have

traveled thousands of miles all over this

country and the many cities and foreign

countries on this investigation, our own

independent investigation.

"And I just state to you frankly

that we have no evidence that there was any

conspiracy involved in this. I will state

this to you further. If at any time there is

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1613

evidence presented -- competent evidence

presented which we can investigate and bear

out that there was a conspiracy involving

this, I assure you as your Attorney General

that we will take prompt and vigorous action

in searching it out and in asking that an

Indictment be returned if there are other

people or if it ever should develop that

other people were involved.

"And you have my assurance on

that. Not only me but the local law

enforcement officers and your national law

enforcement officers. I just wanted to give

you that thought. Thank you very much."

Q. Thank you. If you will just leave

the exhibit here.

A. Yes, sir.

MR. GARRISON: Thank you.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Mr. Young.

A. How are you, sir.

Q. Mr. Young, if you will just turn

again to the first page of the "Voir Dire of

Defendant and Waiver and Order."

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1614

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Where the judge orders Mr. Ray to

stand.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Do you see -- and the judge then

begins to address Mr. Ray.

A. Right. Yes, sir.

Q. Do you see any instance there where

the judge has put Mr. Ray under oath?

A. No, sir, I do not.

Q. Would you turn, Mr. Young, please, to

Page 16?

A. All right, sir.

Q. At this point in the proceedings, the

defendant, Mr. Ray, has -- has interrupted

the proceedings. And would you read what he

has said starting --

A. Is that the lower portion of the

page?

Q. Yes, the last full paragraph starting

at "James Earl Ray."

A. Yes. It states: "Your Honor, I

would like to say something. I don't want to

change anything that I have said, but I just

want to enter one other thing. The only

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1615

thing that I have to say is that I can't

agree with Mr. Clark."

Q. Please continue.

A. Mr. Foreman: "Ramsey Clark?"

And the Court said: "Mr. who?"

Would you like for me to continue?

James Earl Ray stated: "Mr. J.

Edgar Hoover, I agree with all these

stipulations, and I'm not trying to change

anything."

The Court: "You don't agree with

whose theories?"

James Earl Ray: "Mr. Canale's,

Mr. Clark's and Mr. J. Edgar Hoover's about

the conspiracy. I don't want to add

something on that I haven't agreed to in the

past."

Q. That's fine to that point. Now,

would you please turn to Page 48.

A. All right, sir.

Q. This Court and Jury have heard

testimony about a white Mustang with Arkansas

plates parked in this -- in the same position

as this -- this statement here. I'd like you

to read, please, from "Gentlemen, coming back

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1616

to the overall mock-up, the State's proof" --

do you see that? It's the fifth line down --

the end of the fifth line.

A. Yes, sir. "Gentlemen, coming back to

the overall mock-up, the State's proof would

show that between 4:30 and 4:45 p.m.

Mrs. Elizabeth Copeland, who worked across

the street from this area designated as

Canipe Amusement Company, observed a small

white automobile pull up and park in this

general area, as designated by the smaller

car here on the mock-up, to the north of this

light pole and to the south here of Canipe

Amusement Company.

"Mrs. Copeland told a Mrs. Peggy

Hurley: `Peggy, your husband is here for

you.' Mrs. Hurley came to the window and

looked out. She said: `No, that's not my

husband. My car is a Falcon, a white Falcon,

and this is a white Mustang."

Q. Continue.

A. "She did note a man sitting in the

car. Shortly thereafter, Mrs. Hurley's

husband arrived. She got in the car and

left."

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1617

Q. That's fine. Thank you. Would you

please turn over to the next page, Page 49.

This Court and Jury have heard testimony

about the condition of Mr. Stephens at the

time -- a rooming house resident. Would you,

on the fourth line from the bottom, starting

"at approximately 6 p.m.," would you read

from there, please.

A. "At approximately 6 p.m.,

Mr. Stephens heard a shot coming apparently

through this wall in the bathroom. He then

got up and went through this room, out into

the corridor in time to see the left profile

of the defendant as he turned down this

passageway which leads to an opening with a

stairway going down to Main Street."

Q. Now, that's one aspect of proof that

was put the forth. The second aspect of

proof continues right after that. This Court

and Jury have heard evidence with respect to

the dropping of the bundle in front of

Canipe's. That's the second area of proof

that is being referred to. Would you read

from there, please?

A. "Now, gentlemen, you can see here

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1618

this mock-up. This offset area here is in

front of Canipe Amusement Company. It is

reflected here on this mock-up at this

point. Mr. Guy Warren Canipe along with two

customers, Bernell Finley and Julius Graham,

were in Canpie's Amusement Company when they

heard a thud in the area immediately here and

up in this little offset and, looking out,

saw the back of a white man going away from

that area in a general southern direction on

down Main Street observing momentarily

thereafter a white Mustang pull from the curb

heading north on Main Street, one occupant.

"This packet was subsequently

guarded and found to be the rifle, the box,

the suitcase wrapped in a green spread and so

forth that has heretofore been introduced to

you gentlemen through some of the witnesses."

Q. That's -- that's fine. Would you

please turn next to Page 53. This Court and

Jury has heard evidence with respect to the

window sill of the bathroom and the dent in

the window sill. The State's -- would you

comment on the State's proof, please, reading

exactly what was said from "the sill of this

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1619

window."

A. "The sill of this window in the

bathroom was observed by Inspector Zachary to

have what appeared to be a fresh indentation

in it. This sill was ordered removed, was

cut away, and was subsequently sent to the

FBI for comparison. And the proof will show

through expert testimony that the markings on

this sill were consistent with the machine

markings as reflected on the barrel of the 30

aught 6 rifle which has heretofore been

introduced to you."

Q. Would you one more time, please, read

from the line on Page 53 starting with "the

markings on this sill."

A. "The markings on this sill were

consistent with the machine markings as

reflected on the barrel of the 30 aught 6

rifle which has heretofore been introduced to

you."

Q. That's fine. Thank you. Would you

turn to Page 56, please.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. The Court and Jury have heard

evidence with respect to the 30 aught 6 rifle

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1620

in evidence and the fact that the scope was

not sighted in. If you would back up to Page

55, last full sentence, "he changed the

scope" -- State's proof there.

A. "He changed the scope from the

.243 to the .30 aught 6. And at 3 o'clock

that afternoon, he delivered the 30 aught 6,

which is the same rifle that has been

identified here in the courtroom to the

defendant along -- he didn't have a box with

a scope on it."

MR. PEPPER: That's -- that's

fine. Mr. Young, thank you very much for

laboring through this with us. No further

questions.

MR. GARRISON: We have no

further questions.

THE COURT: Go ahead, call your

next witness.

MR. GARRISON: Eli Arkin.

ELI H. ARKIN, Jr.,

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

THE COURT: You may proceed.

DIRECT EXAMINATION

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1621

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Mr. Arkin, tell us your full name

please, sir.

A. Eli H. Arkin, Jr.

Q. And you live here in Memphis,

Tennessee?

A. Yes, I do.

Q. Where do you presently work? Where

are you employed presently?

A. The Cottonwood Company.

THE COURT: Is that A R K I N?

THE WITNESS: Yes, sir.

Q. (BY MR. GARRISON) Now, let me ask

you, you're formerly retired from the Memphis

Police Department; am I correct, sir?

A. I left the police department in 1976.

Q. How long were you with them?

A. 20 years.

Q. All right. And going back to the

year 1967 and 1968 specifically, what

division of the police department were you

working in then?

A. I was in the inspectional bureau.

Q. And so His Honor and Ladies and

Gentlemen of the Jury will understand, what

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1622

do you do in the inspectional bureau?

A. The inspectional bureau was broken

into three parts: inspections, internal

affairs and intelligence.

Q. All right. And was any of these --

specifically these that you worked in,

consisted of what?

A. After I was in the bureau for a

while, I was in intelligence.

Q. Were you the head of the intelligence

division at the time --

A. No.

Q. -- in early '68?

A. No.

Q. Who was the -- who was the chief over

the -- who was over the intelligence

division?

A. Inspector Tynes.

Q. What, Mr. Arkin, was your -- were you

a lieutenant, captain? What was your

ranking?

A. I was a lieutenant.

Q. All right. Now, in early '68, you're

in the Sanitation Strike. Were you asked to

take part in any type of investigation into

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1623

the Sanitation Strike?

A. We were well involved in observing

what was going on and letting the Chief of

Police know when they were going to have a

march or things of that nature.

Q. All right, sir. Who was the chief of

police at that time?

A. Let's see. Chief McDonald had just

left, and Chief Henry Lux.

Q. And who was the police director at

that time?

A. Director Frank Holloman.

Q. Let me, Mr. Arkin, ask you this.

Where was your office located at that time,

in early '68 -- March, April?

A. It was on the second floor of the

police department near the rotunda.

Q. The old police station?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. All right. Was there a time after

the first march by Dr. King in '68 -- or

maybe after the march or before -- when some

Army personnel became stationed in your

office?

A. Yes, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1624

Q. Okay. Did you have any -- did you

have any warning? Did you know that they

would be coming into your office?

A. I'm sorry, sir. I didn't hear you.

Q. Did you have any warning or notice

that they would be coming into your office?

A. Not until they were there.

Q. And who did they say they were? What

were they supposed to do?

A. They said -- they identified

themselves as Army intelligence.

Q. All right. And do you know who sent

them in here?

A. No, sir, I have no idea.

Q. But they were U.S. Army intelligence?

A. According to what Inspector Tynes

told us, yes, sir.

Q. And how many people were there in

your office?

A. Possibly --

Q. In other words, what's the largest

number at one time?

A. Possibly three or four at any one

time.

Q. And what were they doing while they

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1625

were there in your office?

A. Basically observing and taking notes.

Q. How long were they -- were they there

stationed in your office?

A. Sir, I'm sorry, I can't remember.

Q. A week or two, month or two, what

would you --

A. No. At some point I asked Inspector

Tynes to please have them relocated and get

out of our offices.

Q. Had they -- had they just moved in

and pretty much taken over your office?

A. No, sir, they didn't take it over.

They were just there standing around and

listening to what you had to say, whether you

were on the telephone or in any

conversations, and taking notes at the same

time.

Q. I was going to ask you that. Were

they taking notes or recording, making any

photographs or pictures or photos of

anything?

A. Not to my knowledge. Taking notes --

writing notes.

Q. Were they there every day pretty

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1626

much?

A. For a while, yes.

Q. Did -- were they in uniform?

A. No, sir.

Q. They were not in uniform?

A. No, sir.

Q. Well, when they came in, did you have

to arrange some desk space for them, or how

did that come about?

A. No, sir.

Q. How were they -- were they just

standing around all day or did they have

space they worked in?

A. To my knowledge, they didn't have any

desks in there at all. They just roamed back

and forth. We had a fairly large office.

Q. Did you ever have any conversation

with any of those people?

A. Oh, yes, sir.

Q. But they identified themselves as

U.S. Army personnel on the telephone; am I

correct, sir?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. That's what they said?

A. Yes, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1627

Q. And they never said who sent them in

here or what they were doing?

A. They didn't tell me, no.

Q. All right. Mr. Arkin, did there come

a time on April the 4th of 1968 when you used

your vehicle or used a police vehicle to go

down to South Main Street?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. At what time did you go down?

A. Sir, I'm sorry, I don't remember.

Q. Well, are we looking like at mid

afternoon, early morning, what time?

A. I would suggest that probably in the

afternoon.

Q. All right. And where did you go on

South Main Street?

A. To the fire house at Butler and Main.

Q. Okay. And do you know who was in

charge of the fire station there at that

time?

A. No, sir, I don't.

Q. Okay. What was your purpose in going

down there?

A. I was going down there to talk to one

of our patrolman who was stationed there at

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1628

that time.

Q. And what was that patrolman's name?

A. Reddoch.

Q. All right. How long had he been down

there?

A. Sir, again, I'm -- several weeks, I

assume.

Q. And what was the reason you were

dispatched then to talk to him, Mr. Arkin?

A. I was sent down there to retrieve him

and bring him back to the office.

Q. Okay. And under whose orders or

direction did you go down and get him?

A. Director Holloman.

Q. Director Holloman told you to go get

him?

A. Yes. Well, Director Holloman and

Inspector Lux. And I don't remember which

one actually told me to.

Q. Okay. And did they tell you the

reason why they wanted you to go get this

particular officer?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. What was the reason given to you?

A. They said that they had information

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1629

that possibly someone who was from the east

was possibly coming down here to assassinate

a police officer -- a colored police

officer. And the assumption was made, I

guess by them, that it possibly might be

Reddoch.

Q. Okay. So we'll understand, they did

not tell you that this threat was made

against Officer Reddoch, they just said a

police officer; is that right, sir?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And Officer Reddoch was African-

American; am I correct, sir?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. An officer with the police

department?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. And so Director Hollomon's direction

to you was to go to the South Main fire

station to get Officer Reddoch off the job;

am I -- is that correct?

A. Yes, sir. I went to the fire house,

picked up Reddoch, and brought him back to

the police department.

Q. Did anyone go with you?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1630

A. No, sir.

Q. Okay. Now -- and you say it was

around the middle of the afternoon, what, 3

or 4 o'clock, in that range? Would that be a

fair or reasonable time?

A. Sir, I don't remember.

Q. But it would have been the afternoon

you think?

A. Yes, sir, I believe so.

Q. All right. When you arrived at the

fire station, did you see Officer Reddoch?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Okay. And what communication did --

what was said between the two of you?

A. I just basically, I'm sure -- I don't

really remember word for word.

Q. Obviously it's been a long time. But

what do you remember being said between the

two of you?

A. That he was supposed to go back to

the police department with me.

Q. Okay. Did he have any comment about

that?

A. Not that I know of.

Q. All right. And then did you take him

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1631

back to the police department?

A. Yes, sir, I did.

Q. And when you returned to the Police

Department with him, who was there?

A. I'm sorry, who was --

Q. When you returned to the Police

Department with Officer Reddoch, who was

there when you took him back?

A. I brought him to our office.

Q. All right. And who was in your

office when you arrived back?

A. I don't remember, sir.

Q. Was Director Holloman there?

A. I don't remember.

Q. Okay. Were any FBI personnel that

you know of?

A. No, I don't think so.

Q. Any CIA representatives in the office

at the time?

A. I never saw a CIA agent.

Q. Were there any Army personnel still

there?

A. No, sir.

Q. Intelligence. When you took him back

to the office then, what happened after that?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1632

A. At some point I was called down to

Director Holloman's office, I believe, and

told to take Officer Reddoch home.

Q. Who told you that?

A. Sir, I'm sorry, I can't remember

exactly.

Q. I understand. It's been 30 years.

Okay. And someone told you to take him

home. How long was that after you arrived

that you were told to take him home?

A. I don't remember exactly. I can tell

you this, that when we pulled up in front of

his house, he went in the house to talk to

his wife. And during that period of time is

when I heard another officer who was

stationed at the fire house or the

dispatcher, one, I'm not sure which, said

that Dr. King had been shot. So it must have

been right around 6 o'clock or a little

after.

Q. Okay. All right. On the way home

from the police station, Mr. Arkin, did you

have any conversation with Officer Reddoch

about why you were taking him home instead of

returning him to duty?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1633

A. Yes, sir, I'm sure I did.

Q. Okay. And do you remember anything

he said about -- any statement he made about

any threat or anything of that nature?

A. No, sir, I can't remember much about

the conversation at all. His main concern

was that -- it was either his mother or his

wife's mother -- he didn't think that they

would try and move away from the house and go

into an apartment somewhere incognito.

Q. Did you stay there with him then that

afternoon or that night or --

A. No, sir, I did not. They sent, if

I'm not mistaken, a marked squad car.

Q. Okay. And how long did they stay?

Do you have any idea?

A. I have no idea, no.

Q. About the time you arrived is when

you heard on the radio from the dispatcher

Dr. King had been shot?

A. Shortly after we arrived, yes, sir.

Q. Now, Mr. Arkin, are you aware of the

fact that Director Holloman says he didn't --

he never told you to go pick Officer Reddoch

up or didn't have any knowledge that Officer

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1634

Reddoch was supposed to be picked up? Are

you aware of that?

A. No, sir.

Q. Did you conduct any type of

investigation or were any part of an

investigative team that investigated the

assassination of Dr. King? Did you do

anything toward the investigation of the

assassination?

A. No, sir.

Q. You said the threat was -- had came

in from the east, is that what they told

you? Came in the from the east?

A. Came in from Washington D.C. from

what I understand.

Q. All right. And when you arrived at

the fire station, were there any other

African-American firemen or police officers

at that time there?

A. There was a police officer there,

yes.

Q. Do you know who that was?

A. I believe it was -- his name was

Richmond.

Q. Okay. Did he remain at the fire

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1635

station or did he leave also?

A. He stayed there.

Q. Okay. And did you see any

African-American firemen there when you

arrived?

A. No, sir, I didn't.

MR. GARRISON: That's all I

have. Thank you.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good afternoon, Lieutenant. A few

questions. Officer Richmond was also on

surveillance at the fire station.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Was he working under your command?

A. He was working out of the

intelligence bureau, yes, sir.

Q. Did you find him to be a reliable

surveillance officer?

A. I had no reason to doubt him.

Q. And when he submitted reports to you

and others, did you find those reports, as a

rule, to be accurate?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Professionally prepared?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1636

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Because one of his reports has been

put into evidence in these proceedings, and

it's quite impressive in terms of its

detail. And I would have hoped that would

have been your response. Had you ever heard

of -- from the intelligence side, have you

ever heard that there were photographs taken

from the fire station roof by Psychological

Operation Army photographers of the entire

assassination of Martin Luther King?

A. No, sir.

Q. That evidence has been introduced

here. Have you ever heard of that?

A. No, sir.

Q. Never? Never saw any of those

photographs that were taken from --

A. No, sir.

Q. -- the roof? Were you ever advised

that the captain of that fire station,

Carthel Weeden, put those Army photographers

on the roof and put them in the vantage point

for the taking of those photographs?

A. No, sir.

Q. Would that have been something that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1637

perhaps Inspector Tynes would have known

about and not shared?

A. I have no idea, sir.

Q. But you didn't hear about it --

A. No, sir.

Q. -- in any event. Did you in the

course of April 3rd or 4th speak with or talk

to any out-of-town agents -- from whatever

source, you might not have known where they

even were from -- but individuals who you

didn't know as being part of the local FBI

office or the Memphis Police Department? At

any time do you recall speaking to any of

those individuals -- any persons?

A. I'm not sure I understand the

question exactly.

Q. I know it's a long time ago. But do

you recall speaking, in the course of --

let's take April 4th -- with any persons who

came into town from one or another federal

agency about any strategic intelligence

activities?

A. I don't believe I did. I can't

remember if I did.

Q. Okay. You don't remember speaking

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1638

with any of them. Now, lastly -- this is

really just more for the historical record

than anything else. As a trained

intelligence officer, without naming -- we're

not going to ask you to name any informants.

Did you use -- as a part of the modus

operandi, did you use informants in

organizations in Memphis, Tennessee?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. So you -- you ran informants and

obtained -- as a way of obtaining

intelligence information.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Without naming any names, because I

know that you would not want to do that,

would there have been any informants who were

close to Dr. King's organization when he was

in Memphis?

A. I'm not sure I know what you mean by

"close to Dr. King's organization."

Q. Well, people who would have been in

contact with Dr. King or members of his

organization, SCLC, or people who were

aligned with them in support of the

sanitation workers, would you have had any

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1639

informants in those organizations?

A. We had an informant in a local group

called the Invaders.

Q. Yes. And that man's name is public,

so that's -- that's Mr. McCullough, is that

right, Mr. Marrell McCullough?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. All right. But would you have had

any sort of deeper cover -- not interested in

the names -- but any deeper cover individuals

who would have been able to feed you

information with respect to what was going

on?

A. No, sir.

Q. No -- no other ones other than --

A. Not to my knowledge.

Q. Did the FBI office have, again to

your knowledge, any informants in any of

these organizations?

A. They probably did, yes.

Q. So they might have had a wider

intelligence net. Did they share that

information with you?

A. Some information they did, yes.

Q. Okay. So they had informants and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1640

their informants they were running would have

provided you with information.

A. No.

Q. Through them I mean, through the

office.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Thank you. Do you know what

Mr. McCullough did when he left the Memphis

Police Department?

A. No, sir, I have no idea.

Q. Do you know what Mr. McCullough does

today?

A. No, sir, I do not.

Q. You've never heard of what his

occupation is or what he might --

A. I've heard, but --

Q. What have you heard that he is doing?

A. Well, I've heard that he's in the CIA

now.

Q. That he works for the CIA now.

A. But I have no proof of that.

MR. PEPPER: Not directly, but

you just heard that. Okay. Nothing

further. Thank you.

MR. GARRISON: I have nothing

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1641

else. Thank you, Mr. Arkin. You're free to

go.

THE COURT: You may stand down.

THE WITNESS: Thank you, sir.

(Witness excused.)

THE COURT: It's that time

again -- 2 o'clock.

(Lunch recess.)

THE COURT: All right,

Mr. Garrison.

REBECCA A. CLARK,

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Ms. Clark, would you tell us your

full name, please, ma'am.

A. Rebecca A. Clark.

Q. And you live here in Memphis,

Ms. Clark?

A. Yes, I do.

Q. And you've lived here most of your

life?

A. Since high school.

Q. All right. At one time, Ms. Clark,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1642

you were married to -- I believe it was

Captain Earl Clark with the Police

Department; am I correct?

A. Well, actually, he started out as a

patrolman and went as far as chief inspector.

Q. Okay. Now, Ms. Clark, let me say

this -- or ask you this. You and Inspector

Clark were divorced at some period; am I

correct?

A. Yes.

Q. But in 1968, you were married to him

then; is that right?

A. Yes, I was.

Q. During the time of the Sanitation

Strike and the assassination of Dr. King --

A. Yes, sir.

Q. -- you were married to Inspector

Clark; am I correct? Okay. Let me ask you

this. We have taken your testimony before

now. But Inspector Clark had a large

collection of weapons, did he?

A. Yes, he did.

Q. And he was one of the better -- I

guess you call a marksman with the police

department. He had a lot of honors for that,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1643

didn't he?

A. Well, not just for the Police

Department. He won the Tennessee State Trap

Shoot one year.

Q. Okay. And did he work on the -- at

the -- for the police department at the track

where they used weapons to shoot things, like

target practice, things like that? Did he

work there at one time?

A. Yes, he worked at the pistol range.

Q. Pistol range, that's a better word

for it. Do you know, Ms. Clark, during the

Sanitation Strike, was he tied up with that

where he didn't come home -- I mean, did the

police department have him pretty much in --

on duty full time where he wasn't able to

come home for some time?

A. That's correct.

Q. And on the day of April the 4th,

1968, how long had it been since he had been

home then; do you recall?

A. Probably three or four days. Might

have been longer.

Q. Okay.

A. I can't remember.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1644

Q. Now, you were working somewhere at

the time, weren't you?

A. Yes.

Q. And, in fact, you used to work for

the police department. Am I correct that at

one time you were employed at the police

department yourself?

A. Yes, before we married.

Q. Right. I understand. On the day of

April the 4th, 1968, do you remember what

time you came home that day?

A. Well, I got off work at 4 in the

afternoon.

Q. Okay. And how long did it usually

take you to drive home?

A. Probably 10 to 15 minutes.

Q. And when you arrived at your home,

was your husband there?

A. No.

Q. He was not there then.

A. No.

Q. Okay. So you got home around 4:15,

roughly in that range; would that be right?

A. Right.

Q. And how long was it roughly before he

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1645

came home?

A. I really don't remember. It wasn't

right away, but -- probably an hour or so

maybe.

Q. Okay. And he came home -- did you

know he was coming home then?

A. No.

Q. Okay. So he came home unexpectedly.

A. Right.

Q. And what happened when he reached

your home? What happened?

A. Well, he said he came home to get

some clean uniforms. And so when he got

there, he said he thought he would lie down

on the couch in the living room for a few

minutes and take a nap. And then he was

going to take a bath and go back because they

had been staying up all night over at the

pistol range. And so he asked me to listen

to the police radio for him.

Q. Okay.

A. So that's when I heard -- a short

time later -- I don't know how long he was

asleep, maybe 30, 40 minutes -- 45. But

that's when I heard on the radio that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1646

Dr. King had been killed -- had been shot.

Q. Okay. Had your husband made any

statement about the fact that Dr. King was

here and the Sanitation Strike was going

on? Had he made any statement -- comment to

you about that?

A. About him being here?

Q. Yes, ma'am.

A. Well, everybody knew he was here.

Q. Well, had he made any comment to you

about it, the fact that it was tying up a lot

of the police officers and causing a lot of

problems here with the Sanitation Strike?

Did he make any statement to you --

A. I don't recall any conversation like

that.

Q. Well, on your deposition -- let me

ask you -- you remember giving your testimony

before?

A. Yes.

Q. Page 25, the question: "Did you ever

make -- did he ever make any comment about

Dr. King at all? Did he ever say anything

about Dr. King, right, wrong or indifferent?"

Answer: "I'm sure he did. I'm sure

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1647

he was concerned about this being here and

the Sanitation Strike might cause a problem,

which was" --

Do you remember giving that answer?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Okay.

A. But I don't recall any specific

conversation that he -- you know, I'm sure he

must have commented about it.

Q. Okay. At some point you left to go

get a uniform for him.

A. Yes, sir, I did. When I woke him up

and told him that Dr. King had been killed,

he said, you've got to go get my uniforms out

of the cleaners before they close. And he

was going to take a bath while I was gone.

Q. Okay. And, Ms. Clark, you're aware

of the fact -- you know that there's been

some testimony/allegation made that

Lieutenant Clark was at the back of the

rooming house across from the Lorraine Motel

on the day that this occurred. You know

that, don't you?

A. Well, at the time of the deposition I

didn't know that. Matter of fact, I didn't

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1648

really know why I was called to give a

deposition.

Q. Okay.

A. I mean, I had heard of this thing

about a conspiracy but I, in my wildest

imagination, never dreamed that they thought

that he was involved or the police department

was involved.

Q. Okay.

A. I found out about a week later when

two -- two gentlemen from the Justice

Department called me and asked me if they

could come out and talk to me. And then

that's when they told me that you all thought

that he was involved. And that was the first

I had heard.

Q. Okay. Well, he had only been home

for a very short time when you left to go get

his uniform, hadn't he?

A. Yes. I don't think he was asleep

over 30, 45 minutes.

Q. Okay. Ms. Clark, I know we talked

about this before when we took your

deposition. But isn't it true that Inspector

Clark had a rather bitter feeling toward

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1649

African-American people? Truthfully.

A. I don't -- I wouldn't say that he had

a -- bitter feelings. I know that after his

brother was killed that he probably felt some

kind of animosity for a period of time. But

I know that he had a lot of black friends

that he had met through law enforcement over

the years.

Q. Okay. Let me ask you something.

Now, you said that when he reached his home

that he had a police radio with him.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. What type of police radio was it?

A. It's kind of like a little walkie

talkie because it was laying on the dining

room table.

Q. Okay. Now, are you sure about that?

A. Well, I could hear him.

Q. According to the information we have,

they didn't have walkie talkies back in

1968. Are you sure it was a walkie talkie?

A. It was some kind of radio.

MR. GARRISON: That's all.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1650

Q. Ms. Clark, excuse me one minute, I'm

just reorganizing the copy of the deposition

that we let you examine and that counsel has

just used. I know this may not be very easy

for you. Thank you for coming here this

afternoon.

How many children do you have,

Mrs. Clark?

A. I have two.

Q. And the first time that we met -- do

you recall that afternoon?

A. Yes, I did. I didn't know who you

were the second time I met you, which was

some years later, but --

Q. Okay. And were one of your children

present when we spoke? Your son?

A. I believe he was. I'm not sure.

Q. Do you know how old he was then?

A. There's about -- he's 27. It was

about in '92 or 3. So --

Q. When was he born, Mrs. Clark?

A. He was born in February of '73.

Q. So he was in his early 20's at that

time?

A. Right.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1651

Q. May I ask, are you a Christian?

A. Yes, I am.

Q. Do you believe that the sins of the

father should be visited upon the children?

A. No, I don't.

Q. And that the children should bear no

blame for any sins of the fathers?

A. I certainly believe that.

Q. Do your children believe that?

A. Yes.

Q. That's clear?

A. Sure.

Q. Okay. Now, in Mr. Clark's

professional life were there things that he

did -- activities that he conducted that you

knew nothing about?

A. You mean in -- as far as police

work? I'm sure.

Q. And in his personal life?

A. He may have. I don't -- I don't

know.

Q. Did you know Mr. Frank Liberto?

A. Well, in my deposition you all asked

me that. And the only Frank Liberto that I

had ever heard of owned a liquor store down

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1652

in south Memphis. And the reason I

remembered that name was we had gone down

there one night, and this black gentleman

came in with high heels and a dress on.

And back then, that was kind of odd

to me, so that's the only reason I recall

that incident. But that's the only Frank

Liberto I've ever heard of.

Q. You've never heard of Frank Liberto

who owned and ran a warehouse -- a produce

warehouse called Scott Street Market?

A. No. I've seen that name over there

because I've been to Scott Street Market lots

of times. And I've seen the name, but I

didn't know the man.

Q. You didn't know him?

A. No.

Q. Did you not know of his -- your

husband's relationship with --

A. No.

Q. -- this man?

A. No.

Q. Did you know of your husband's

relationship with Mr. Loyd Jowers, the

defendant in this action?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1653

A. No, I didn't.

Q. But your husband used to go,

according to testimony and evidence in this

case, hunting with Mr. Jowers. You didn't

know he went hunting with Mr. Jowers?

A. No. I've never heard that name

mentioned with him going hunting. And I know

a lot of people that he went hunting with.

Q. All right. And you never heard about

him going hunting with Mr. Jowers?

A. No, sir.

Q. Or of his -- his close relationship

with Mr. Jowers?

A. No, sir.

Q. And you never heard him -- he never

mentioned Mr. Frank Liberto to you?

A. No, sir.

Q. Did he ever mentioned Inspector John

Barger?

A. I remember him.

Q. You remember that name?

A. Yes.

Q. Inspector Eddie Zachary?

A. I remember him.

Q. But not Mr. Liberto and not

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1654

Mr. Jowers?

A. No.

Q. If, Mrs. Clark -- if what evidence

has been placed into this Court by -- in

fact, by the defendants in these

proceedings. If that evidence is true and

your husband was involved in the

assassination of Martin Luther King, how do

you -- how would you feel about that?

A. That's impossible.

Q. You can't imagine that?

A. Well, I know not. I know he was

there.

Q. You know he wasn't --

A. And there's not any possibility as

far as I'm --

Q. There's not any possibility?

A. No, sir.

Q. What time did you get home from work

again on the 4th of April?

A. I get off at 4.

Q. You got home about 4:15?

A. About 4:15.

Q. All right.

A. Now, what time he got there, I do not

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1655

remember. It's been a long time ago.

Q. In your deposition, you indicated he

got home fairly soon after you arrived home

from work. Do you know when that would have

been?

A. 30, 45 minutes. Fairly soon.

Q. Fairly soon after you arrived is 30

or 45 minutes?

A. I can't remember exactly, sir.

Q. You don't remember what time he

arrived?

A. No, I don't.

Q. What did you do when you got home

from work that day?

A. What did I do?

Q. Mm-hum.

A. Changed clothes, probably started

cleaning or something, like everybody does

when they get home, I guess. I don't know.

Q. At what point in the course of you

performing your tasks did he come into the

house?

A. Sir, I don't remember what time it

was.

Q. I mean, you don't know if you were

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1656

cleaning --

A. No.

Q. -- or changing, or what it was you

were doing at that time?

A. I can't remember.

Q. All right. And what car was he

driving when he came home?

A. I really couldn't say. I just

assumed that he was driving a police car.

Q. Well, where would he park the car

when he came in?

A. Right at the back door of the

apartments.

Q. At the back door. Was there a

driveway that ran up to the back door?

A. Yes, it was.

Q. So he would have parked the car in

the driveway --

A. Yes.

Q. -- near the back door. Did you look

at it?

A. No.

Q. Did you look out? Did you see the

car?

A. No.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1657

Q. Did you see him depart?

A. I don't know that I went to the back

door to watch him leave. I'm sure I said

goodbye, but I don't specifically remember

going and, you know, waving.

Q. All right. Did you see him drive

off?

A. I don't recall that.

Q. You don't recall seeing him drive

off?

A. No, I don't.

Q. And he drove off after -- after you

came back from the cleaners with his -- his

clean uniform?

A. Yes.

Q. Did he call you that afternoon before

he arrived home?

A. No.

Q. He just came home.

A. Yes.

Q. Ms. Clark, on Page 54 of your

deposition -- which was taken some while

earlier, in April of this year -- you were

asked: "And how long did it take you to get

home?"

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1658

You answered: "Not long. 10, 15

minutes."

The question is: "So you were

probably home around 4, 4:15 or so, something

like that."

A. Right.

Q. "Yes."

"And soon after you set foot in the

house did Mr. Clark call you?"

Your answer was: "Not long as I

recall."

The question was: "15 -- 10, 15

minutes, something like that?"

Answer: "Well, yes."

Question: "He might have been home

some time around 4:30; is that right?"

The answer was: "I don't know to be

honest. I don't really remember. I just

know that I was home from work and he wasn't

asleep very long when I heard the radio. I

woke him up. He ran to get a shower while I

went to get his uniforms. That's all I

remember."

Now, in fact, Martin Luther King was

killed just shy of two hours -- two hours

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1659

after you arrived home. What I'm trying to

understand is if your husband came in shortly

after you arrived home and was only there for

almost an hour after he left the house of

unexplained time.

A. Well, as I said, I wasn't sure about

the times that he got there or how long he

was there.

Q. Yes.

A. The only thing I do know was that I

was listening to the radio when they came on

and said that he was shot.

Q. You were listening --

A. Because I remember about the blue --

they were talking about a blue Mustang.

Q. A blue Mustang?

A. Yes. Something about a Mustang. I

don't know whether it was blue or not, but it

was --

Q. And you heard that on a police

radio --

A. Yes.

Q. -- at some point --

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1660

Q. -- that was sitting somewhere in your

dining room?

A. Right.

Q. And your husband had been asleep

somewhere -- in the living room?

A. He was asleep on the couch in the

living room.

Q. I'm trying to understand what

happened during that hour. How long did he

sleep?

A. I don't know. I don't remember. I

have to hide my own Easter eggs. I can't

remember.

Q. That's a very long time ago. That's

a very long time ago. But you understand the

problem?

A. I know what you're saying, but I just

can't -- you know, if I could remember how

long or when he got there -- I really don't.

Q. The problem that I'm putting to you

is the possibility that your husband did come

home -- and you're telling the truth. To the

best of your recollection, you're telling the

truth.

A. I know I am.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1661

Q. And he came home.

A. Yes.

Q. But the times indicate that not only

did he come home and ask you to go to the

cleaners -- Dent Cleaners on Broad Street to

get fresh uniforms --

A. Yes.

Q. Which you did and which you brought

it back and he put it on and left. The times

indicate that he left, in fact, much

earlier -- within an hour of the killing.

A. It couldn't --

Q. And that he was somewhere else during

that hour.

A. He couldn't have been. He could not

have been anywhere else. Because when it

came over the radio -- and I heard it. He

asked me to listen to his radio because he

was going to take a short nap.

Q. That's the thing we haven't taken

into account.

A. And that's what I did. And that's

when I heard that he was shot. So it

couldn't have been -- so he had to have been

there longer than the hour or whatever you're

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1662

talking about.

Q. That's what we haven't taken into

account, isn't it?

A. Right. See, I can't remember --

Q. This walkie talkie --

A. -- exactly how long he was there.

Q. This walkie talkie, this radio, which

as counsel has --

A. He's had one as long as I can

remember.

Q. Counsel has indicated that they

weren't standard issue yet --

A. They may not have --

Q. -- in the Memphis Police Department.

A. -- been standard issue, but he had

one. He -- you know, at my deposition -- at

that time I thought I recalled that he was on

the TAC squad at the time, but I don't --

looking back now, I think that he probably

was just assigned to the pistol range because

I think that was too early in his career --

'68. So, you know.

Q. And he wasn't on the TAC squad, that

he was assigned --

A. He may have just been assigned to the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1663

pistol range, and that's where they were

staying. I don't -- you know, I hadn't

looked -- I hadn't looked back to see or

researched to see exactly where he was

assigned. He was on the TAC squad at one

time, but whether it was that particular time

or not, I -- you know, I'm not positive.

Q. It's the walkie talkie or the radio

that convinces you that he was still there at

the time because you heard it.

A. Yes.

Q. That's what you're saying?

A. Yes, sir. I woke him up, and that's

when he said, you've got to get over to the

cleaners before they close to get my

uniforms. Because he came home specifically

to take a bath and get some clean uniforms

because they had been gone for so many days.

Q. Ms. Clark, if the -- if these -- if

these were not available at the time, if they

in fact were not standard issue or special-

issue walkie talkie communications to Memphis

Central Police Headquarters -- if this was

not possible, these were not available, what

are we to believe?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1664

A. Why would I make that up about a

police radio if I didn't hear it?

Q. Did you discuss the assassination

with Mr. Clark --

A. No.

Q. -- after it took place?

A. No.

Q. You didn't have any --

A. I don't think so.

Q. -- discussion with him at all?

A. Not that I recall. We may have

mentioned it. He may have mentioned it, or

we may have mentioned it. But a specific

conversation I don't remember.

Q. Ms. Clark, the assassination of

Martin Luther King, you will agree, was a

heinous, terrible act --

A. Absolutely.

Q. -- and a blot on this community?

A. Absolutely.

Q. Which has never -- from which this

community has never really fully recovered?

A. Absolutely. I do understand that.

Q. Is it possible that here this

afternoon, every good intention in the world,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1665

that you are trying to protect your loved

children from being a part of this whole

scenario -- being dragged into this in any

way?

A. Sir, I have told this story about

what happened or where he was as far back --

before there was ever any thought of

conspiracy, ever.

Q. Who has asked you about this

question? Who has asked you to tell this

story?

A. I've told it to everybody. Everybody

has said: Well, what was Earl doing? Where

were you? And so and so. I've told

everybody at work where -- where he was.

And, you know, this story has been told a

million times. I told you this story back in

1992 --

Q. Yes, you did.

A. -- before I ever heard of a

conspiracy. So why would I have lied then?

Q. Yes, you -- well, the reason I

started my query of you about the children

was because I recalled the presence of your

son at that time and his attentiveness in the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1666

course of that -- of that discussion. And

that's why I've asked you the last question

about the protection of the children.

A. Sir, I'm just telling the truth.

I -- you know, it never entered my mind that

I'm trying to protect my children. I would

if I -- you know, I would want to protect my

children.

Q. If in fact you --

A. But I am not -- I am telling the

truth as far as I know the truth as much as I

remember.

Q. That's fair enough. If in fact the

truth were something else, would you tell

this story? To protect your children, to

insulate them from any possible repercussions

of this act, would you tell this story?

A. No. I would never lie. I would

never tell --

Q. No matter what the consequences would

be?

A. No matter. I mean, their father is

dead. I mean --

Q. But they're alive.

A. Pardon?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1667

Q. They're alive and they have lives.

A. Yes, they do. And they're making

good lives.

Q. Why would --

A. And I love them dearly, but I would

not lie.

Q. Why would anyone put your husband in

the middle of this frame? What reason would

they have?

A. I don't have the faintest clue.

Q. Why would a Memphis taxi driver quote

your husband as saying: I'm going to kill

Martin Luther King the next time he comes to

Memphis, Tennessee? Why would --

A. I don't know.

Q. -- James McCraw --

A. Why is anybody --

Q. Why would he say that about your

husband?

A. -- saying all this stuff? I just

don't -- you know.

Q. You don't know why people say things,

of course. But that's a problem that we

have.

A. All I know is --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1668

Q. We don't know why --

A. All I know is I'm telling you the

truth the best that I know -- the best that I

know it.

Q. The truth as best you know it is you

came in around 4:15, he came in some time

shortly thereafter.

A. Yes. What time, I do not know.

Q. You're not sure of that exact time.

But at some point in the course of his

sleep -- and he was sleeping then maybe for

an hour and a half -- not 30 minutes, as you

indicated earlier in the deposition, but

maybe he was asleep for an hour and a half.

Because he would have had to be asleep for

about an hour and a half for you to hear on

the radio that Martin Luther King had been

assassinated.

A. Unless he came in later than 30

minutes.

Q. Unless he came in later.

A. See, I don't remember. But all I'm

saying is that I was listening to the radio

and heard it with my own ears.

Q. When you came back from the cleaners,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1669

was he awake?

A. No -- yes, yes. I woke him up when I

heard it. And that's when he said, you've

got to get over to the cleaners and get my

uniforms before they close.

Q. Okay. So you -- you were in the

house all the time. He was asleep. You

heard it, you woke him up. He said, go to

the cleaners.

A. Yes.

Q. But he had been asleep for all this

period of time, for whatever period --

A. Yes.

Q. -- hour, hour and a half?

A. Yes.

Q. On the sofa?

A. Yes.

Q. And he then put on his uniform and

reported to work. Where did he go?

A. I have -- I assume that he was going

back to the pistol range.

Q. Why would he go to the pistol range?

A. Because that's where they had been

staying.

Q. He would go back to the pistol range

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1670

when there -- the city was in turmoil --

fires and turbulence and assassination?

A. Sir, I don't know where he was

assigned. I do not know where he -- I just

assumed -- when he told me they had been

staying over at the pistol range and sleeping

over there, I just assumed that he was going

back over there. I do not know where he went

from there.

Q. When he left the house he was in

uniform?

A. I don't specifically remember, but

I'm -- feel sure he was in a uniform because

I had to go get his uniforms.

Q. And what uniform was he wearing at

that time of year?

A. Well, I don't remember. I don't

recall what kind of uniform. If he was -- if

he was assigned to the pistol range, he had

on gray uniforms -- gray khaki uniforms.

Q. Which uniform did you pick up,

Mrs. Clark --

A. I don't remember.

Q. -- at the cleaners?

A. I don't remember which.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1671

Q. As he walked out the door was he --

A. In fact, you all asked me that before

and I couldn't remember.

Q. That's fair enough. As he walked out

the door was he in short sleeves or did he

have --

A. I do not know. I don't remember.

Q. Did he leave from the rear door or

the front door?

A. The rear door.

Q. Because that's where the car was?

A. Yes.

Q. Did he normally drive a police car

home?

A. Yes, lots of times.

Q. Was it an unmarked car or was it a

regular Memphis police car?

A. Most of the time it was a regular

car.

Q. And what color was that car?

A. Black and white, I think.

Q. It was a black and white regular --

not a traffic car but a regular black and

white car?

A. Right, far as I can remember.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1672

Q. And his rank at that time --

A. I don't recall.

Q. -- in 1968?

A. I want to say he was lieutenant, but

I'm not sure.

Q. I see. Okay. And you don't remember

whether he had short sleeves, long sleeves --

A. No.

Q. -- a jacket or anything else on?

A. He didn't have too many short-sleeve

uniforms. They had -- they had some -- the

gray uniforms when they were shooting on the

pistol team, but that's the only short sleeve

ones I remember.

Q. And when you --

A. He could have been -- he could have

been wearing short ones over there at the

pistol range where he worked.

Q. When you were listening to this radio

sitting on your dining room table, where were

you?

A. I think I was in the kitchen.

Q. Right off the dining room?

A. Right.

Q. And he was in the living room off the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1673

other side?

A. Well, you go through the kitchen into

the dining room and there's the living room.

It was just an apartment -- a two-bedroom

apartment. It wasn't a house.

Q. Did any investigators from the House

Select Committee on Assassinations in 1977 or

'78 interview you?

A. At where? In what?

Q. The Congressional committee --

A. No.

Q. -- that looked into this case. They

never interviewed you?

A. No, sir.

Q. Did any FBI investigators ever

interview you?

A. No, sir. The only interviews that I

ever had was when you came and talked to me

that time. And then after I gave my

deposition there were two guys from the

Justice Department that called and came out

and talked to me. And that's when they told

me that -- that you all thought my husband

was involved.

Q. At that point in time?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1674

A. Yes.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you,

Mrs. Clark. Nothing further, Your Honor.

MR. GARRISON: I have nothing

further. You may step down.

THE COURT: You may stand down,

ma'am. You can remain in the courtroom or

you're free to go.

THE WITNESS: Okay. Thank you.

(Witness excused.)

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, at

this time I'd like to read from the

deposition of a witness. For security

reasons, same as the jury, we did not want

his identity known. He will be referred to

as John Doe.

This is the deposition of John Doe

taken on November the 5th, 1999. And I was

present for the defendant, Mr. Jowers, and

Dr. Pepper was present for the plaintiffs.

And these were the questions that were asked

of this witness. Page 5:

(Whereupon the following is the

deposition of John Doe that was read into the

record.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1675

THE VIDEOGRAPHER: This is the

videotaped deposition of Mr. John Doe. It's

being taken by the plaintiffs in the matter

of King versus Jowers in the Circuit Court of

Tennessee for the Thirtieth Judicial District

at Memphis. It's being held via telephone at

the offices of Daniel, Dillinger, Dominski in

Memphis, Tennessee, on November 5, 1999, the

time being approximately 4:03 p.m.

The court reporter is Kristin

Peterson from Daniel, Dillinger, Dominski.

The videotape specialist is Ted Schurch with

The Data Company in Memphis.

Will counsel now please introduce

themselves.

DR. PEPPER: William Pepper for

the King family, plaintiffs in these

proceedings.

MR. GARRISON: I'm Lewis

Garrison for defendant, Loyd Jowers.

VIDEOGRAPHER: Do you have any

announcements or stipulations you'd like to

put on the record?

DR. PEPPER: None for the

plaintiffs.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1676

MR. GARRISON: And none for the

defendant.

JOHN DOE,

Having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. All right. We're referring to you as

John Doe. As I've indicated to you earlier,

we have an agreement that we will not reveal

your identity for purposes that you and I

have discussed.

Let me ask you this. In the year of

1968, were you in the Memphis area?

A. Yes.

Q. And you, of course, know that the

assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King

occurred on April 4, 1968?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Now, let me ask you this. You

and I have talked about this many times.

Would you start -- I believe the first time

that you gave me information was along about

January of 1998. Is that about correct?

A. That's correct.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1677

Q. All right. Would you tell us at that

point what -- what happened, what you know

and what personally you were involved and how

you know about it.

A. As regards --

Q. The very beginning of your meeting in

a hotel -- Holiday Inn in Detroit, I believe;

is that correct?

A. Well, it was in -- let's see, okay.

Let's -- it's Battle Creek, Michigan.

Q. All right. Go right ahead.

A. Yeah. All right. I had known some

individuals, one person in particular was a

layoff bookmaker from the Houston/Galveston

area who owned a seafood place there on the

Gulf Coast. He said his name was J.B.

Bonner. And at that particular time, I was

working in the sports department at the

Houston Post, and he had called for

information because -- you've got to remember

that they -- that high school football was

like their Super Bowl. Anyway, that's how I

got to know J.B. Now --

Q. Could you spell his last name for

us -- this gentleman you are talking about --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1678

J.B --

A. O N N E R.

Q. Okay. Go right ahead.

A. Okay. Now, then through him, I was

in Battle Creek, Michigan, later on in my

employment to do some things there in East

Lansing, Michigan.

Q. Okay.

A. And Mr. Bonner wanted me to contact

or sit down and talk to a fellow by the name

of Emil Mazey, M A Z E Y, who I learned later

is the -- was the treasurer of the United

Auto Workers.

I met him there, and then we met two

or three more occasions on -- and at the Red

Apple Inn in Northwest Arkansas, mainly, is

where we talked, and it was at this time that

it was explained to me what Mr. Mazey wanted

and what he was doing. And the idea that was

given to me was that Walter Ruther, who was

president of the UAW had been hit on pretty

hard by Hubert Humphrey and L.B.J. about

Martin Luther King's sudden -- whatever he

did, he came out against the Vietnam War, and

you have to remember that there was a problem

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1679

there between the UAW and the CIO with George

Meedy.

And Meedy and the CIO -- they were

pushing for the war, and the UAW, up until

that point, had been a real supporter of

the -- let's see if I remember -- Southern

Leadership Conference of which King was

involved nominally. I mean, he really didn't

have anything to do with it. But, anyway, it

was put to me is there a way to satisfy

Mr. Humphrey and Mr. Johnson by making Martin

Luther King, quote-unquote, I guess, "shut

up" about the Vietnam War. And I asked him

what that -- what did they mean by that.

And they said, well, by just taking

him out, getting through with it. And I had

done some work in the military and things

like that. And so I said, I can do that.

And they offered four hundred thousand

dollars to --

Q. Okay. Now, we got to the point where

you said that they had been offered four

hundred thousand dollars maybe, and just go

on from there.

A. Okay. Now, to me, this was kind of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1680

an interesting proposition. This has nothing

at all what to do with race or anything like

that. It was obvious that they had some

things already put in motion.

What I did was contact Jim Harmon,

H A R M O N, a pilot who died in Korea, and

who's supposed to be buried in Mills City,

Oregon, but he's not, and then through Carlos

Marcello in New Orleans, Ruelsa Mellon,

R U E L S A M E L L O N, who was based out

of Tegucigalpa, Honduras.

There was another lady involved.

Her name was Dori, D O R I, Wyse, W Y S E.

She was from Belize, and she was in that area

supposedly to do research on antebellum homes

and so forth.

The way I understood it, the

Trafficante down in Tampa had gotten a hold

of Marcello and asked him if he could take

care of this, and he said, no, he couldn't.

Most of the FBI was all over him because of

his J.F.K. problem, not which was correct,

and so then through that and Ruelsa, we

got -- kind of got together about the whole

thing in New Orleans and discussed it.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1681

Marcello was there, and he said he

couldn't be involved, XYZ, but we could

use -- there was about a three-mile-long

seashell-type small runway on his property

just west of the Mississippi there, and I

don't -- it's Metairie or however the

Louisianans say it.

Anyway, we agreed to do this, and

the idea was we knew whatever King was doing,

but Dori Wyse's job was to indicate when King

would be back at the motel. We knew the

room, but -- so we could set that up, and

when he finally went out to do whatever he

was doing -- he was preaching to somebody

or -- anyway, he comes back. She calls then

through to Mellon, and he contacts Harmon,

who picks me up in Tampa.

We go on up there, find the little

airport, fly right up the Mississippi on Mud

Island. She picks the two of us up,

Harmon -- Jim stayed at the plane. We come

down to the area that was selected. Now,

I --

Q. What kind of vehicle was she driving,

do you remember?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1682

A. Yeah. It was a sixty -- I believe a

1967 gray Corvette.

Q. Okay.

A. Not a Corvette.

Q. Corvair?

A. Corvair, yeah.

Q. All right. Chevrolet Corvair?

A. Yeah, two-door.

Q. Okay.

A. And on the side, it had on there

Aztec Aerial Mapping, just like the plane,

and then -- you know, to give you a reason

why you were in there in the first place.

So then we went on up there, and she

moved on around down by Mulberry there,

kind of a -- kind of just to park there, and

drop them. And Raul, he went upstairs to

the window area up there. Nobody told him to

go in the -- into any kind of bathroom or

closet or anything like that, but he

apparently decided that, already had his bag

full of everything he was supposed to leave.

James Earl Ray was never even

there. He had left for Atlanta. I think he

spent the night in Starkville, Mississippi,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1683

on the way over, but he'd left about three

hours before all this even came down. He was

set up for that type of thing.

And then when the actual shooting of

King took place, it was behind kind of a

brushy little wall there just a couple

hundred feet away. He used a sixteen-gauge

modified rifle that had been made by a Pedro

Ginton.

Q. Okay. What was it again? Tell us

what it was again.

A. Ginton, G I N T O N.

Q. Okay.

A. Of Belize City.

Q. Belize City is where it was made?

A. Yeah.

Q. Okay.

A. The idea was that -- it's the kind of

shot that when it hits something, it starts

to mess around. And if you move with it, it

just falls apart.

Q. The shot itself?

A. Yeah.

Q. Go ahead.

A. Okay. So then he -- the shot was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1684

done, and Dori comes around and picks up the

shooter, and they go on back down to Mud

Island. Jim's got the plane ready, we take

off, and are flying right down the

Mississippi right back down to Marcello's

place, and opened the door and throw the gun

and two or three other things out of there.

Q. Out of the plane?

A. Uh-huh, into the river.

Q. Okay.

A. Because he was flying real low, and

we went on down there, and we all left there,

and went on back to Tampa.

Now, Raul, he was supposed to drop

a bag of stuff that he had managed to put

together, just childish things really -- but

people believed, apparently -- into a bag,

and he was supposed to drop that upstairs

someplace -- I've never been in that

building -- but he didn't. He dropped it

outside the door but then went and got in his

car, which was a white Ford, you know, and

then drove away from there.

Now, he drove to New Orleans.

There -- picked Ray up in Atlanta, and then

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1685

from there they flew on to Canada.

Q. Okay. Now, let me ask you

something. Did you ever actually see James

Earl Ray?

A. No.

Q. Okay. You've been told about him?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. Sometime later, you had a

chance -- you had an assignment in South

America or somewhere in Central America; am I

correct, sir?

A. Right.

Q. And you had a chance to -- in your

assignment to run and meet with the warden of

the prison where Ray had been before he

escaped; is that correct?

A. Correct.

Q. Okay. Tell us about your

conversations and your association with the

warden as to what you found out from that?

A. Well, the warden's name -- the

best -- I know his last name, but I think his

first name was Harold -- Harold Swenson. And

he was running the Missouri State Pen, and he

had spent some time in the -- over at

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1686

Leavenworth working in the federal pen over

there. And they had got him from there, and

sent him down -- I believe it was to Mexico

where they were having some kind of prison

riot and all that.

He went down there, worked on that,

and then that was settled, apparently, and

then he went back and was hired on as warden

at the Missouri State Pen.

Now, Swenson indicated that he knew

of a person, the ideal for a -- oh, he used a

corny word -- patsy or something like that.

And I don't know if that came directly from

Swenson's knowledge or from other guards who

worked there at Leavenworth because Ray

wasn't there. And the idea was that

Swenson -- which has always amazed me

anyway -- but that he would work it out to

where they'd get Ray out of the pen on a --

on a Sunday morning, drive him out someplace,

and he'd just disappear.

I never -- the FBI -- no one ever

even indicated, you know, what the -- who the

driver was other than to say he was a -- and

I know nothing about all of that little

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1687

work.

Q. Okay.

A. All I know is that Raul picked him

up, picked James Earl Ray up, somewhere there

at Jefferson City. They had set it up and

had gone on to Chicago, hung around there for

a while and then went on to Canada.

Now, this was all, of course, four

or five -- well, probably more months than

that before the actual thing. But by then

Ray was pretty well doing whatever Mellon

told him.

They drove around, did all kinds of

stuff. It didn't cost that much money. And

then after setting him up to go buy some -- a

rifle and then another rifle, and no -- to be

very frank, you know, James Earl isn't going

to win or wouldn't have won any grants to

college. He really wanted to be involved in

something.

He never -- as far as I know,

because I never saw him, the only -- Harmon

never saw him. Dori never saw him. The only

person that dealt with him was Mellon, and

that was the way we set it up. And then,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1688

eventually, the way I understood it was, that

the UAW people were going to get him out of

Canada and fly him to Lisbon, Portugal, and

there they were going to kill him. They were

going to take care of it there, and that

would be the end of the whole thing.

Now, something went wrong in Lisbon,

apparently, because Ray came, and, you know,

turns up in London or someplace, and then

he's arrested, and they drag him back and go

through all of this, and that's why you got

to believe when Ray -- who is dead, you

know -- said I don't know anything about

this, he's -- he's telling the truth.

Q. Okay.

A. He didn't.

Q. Let me ask you something, too. The

guns that they -- were brought in the night

of the assassination, what did they have

those in?

A. Could you repeat -- I didn't --

Q. I think you had mentioned to me --

can you hear me okay?

A. Yeah.

Q. You mentioned to me before that --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1689

about this car that had something about

some -- what did it have on the side of it?

Aztec Aerial Mapping?

A. Yeah, Aerial Mapping.

Q. Okay. Have you told me before that

the guns were hidden in map cases?

A. Right.

Q. You actually saw that?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. The four hundred thousand

dollars, do you know where it came from?

A. Yes. It came from the United Auto

Workers.

Q. All right. Okay. Now, is this about

everything that you know about the case?

Have you heard anything else about whatever

happened to these people that you mentioned

earlier?

A. Well, I think we all know that it

took two tries, but they finally -- Ruther

finally was killed in a private jet crash.

They had tried to kill him and his

brother a year before when they had flown to

Washington, and all they did manage there was

that the pilot hit the landing, turning right

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1690

at the end of the runway. So in about

another year, we try it again, and this time

it worked.

I have heard -- I don't know for

sure, but it could easily be checked -- the

National Transportation Board people say that

the altimeter for Ruther totally rules out --

that was the same as backwards -- in other

words, the pilot really didn't know how low

he was.

Mazey, I think, went ahead and

stayed in the Union for a while, then died.

He was in World War II, I know that.

And Harmon, he began flying for

Marcello or either Trafficante -- I don't

know which one -- flying stuff -- drugs and

stuff through the Carribean. Haven't heard

from him in years.

I know that Dori died in Nicaragua

two years ago during that volcano they had

there after that earthquake and the hurricane

situation.

Q. Did you ever hear the name of Frank

Liberto mentioned by Carlos Marcello?

A. No.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1691

Q. Did you ever hear the name of Loyd

Jowers mentioned at any time?

A. No.

Q. Okay. This Warden Swenson -- you --

the two of you became pretty close on your

assignment; is that correct?

A. Well, we were close enough to

understand what we were doing. I -- I felt,

you know, because right off the bat that

Ruther had Swenson pretty well where he

wanted him.

In fact, I think one of the -- of

course, this has been a successful thing all

the way through, obviously -- but one of the

strangest stories was that -- reported in

the -- hell, I forget what the -- St. Louis,

maybe Post -- that Swenson after he retired

during a New Years party, I believe, or a

Christmas party had shot himself. And the

woman that had reported this lived right next

door to it all, and I never heard anything

else about that. Again, you know, I wasn't

going to check it for sure, but I -- I can't

verify it, but that -- anyway, he's gone.

Mazey, I think, just died

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1692

naturally. Humphrey, of course, we know, and

L.B.J.

Q. This Warden Swenson, he had had a

position in the L.B.J. or Kennedy

Administration; am I correct?

A. What he had was, he was in the -- I

think they used to call it a blind squad for

the federal prison system.

Q. In fact, he was the one that

directed, I believe, you to pilot Gary Powers

to Russia; am I correct?

A. Right.

MR. GARRISON: Page 38 of his

deposition.

(Continuing to read from the

deposition.)

Q. The airport that Marcello -- the

small airstrip that Marcello said you could

use --

A. Uh-huh.

Q. -- where did you say that was

located?

A. Well, it's across the river, across

the Mississippi from New Orleans. He had a

huge place over there, and most of it's

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1693

swamps.

Q. Yes.

A. But he did have this airstrip -- in

fact, he had two. But this one was the kind

that you could count on getting down real

quick. This is what Jim told me -- get down,

get pulled up real quick and get out of

there, you know, because the weather had been

so bad all through that particular time, all

the way from Memphis -- all the way to Tampa

for that matter. And it was raining, and I

don't think he particularly wanted to land.

There was a dirt strip there that

ran kind of clockwise -- excuse me --

clockwise away from the one we used. Got

there -- when we got back there that night,

they had turned on some lights around the

field, and you could see the reflection of

the shells, and were there for Jim to get the

plane down. We weren't there fifteen

minutes.

Q. Right. And you flew from that

airstrip of Marcello's? You took off from

there?

A. Yeah.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1694

MR. GARRISON: Page 57,

beginning with Line 22.

(Continuing to read from the

deposition.)

Q. What had he -- what was his job?

What had -- what was he supposed to have

done?

A. His job was to place and put in

locations -- I don't know if it could ever

be, you know, declared evidence, but put

things around that would indicate that James

Earl Ray was -- had been there -- had been in

that area and was responsible for whatever

took place.

Q. He was to plant -- plant evidence

against James?

A. Yeah.

Q. And where was James during this time?

A. He had left around -- he was supposed

to, so I presume he did, because he made it

to Atlanta, but he left around 3:00.

Q. And what was -- what kind of car was

Ruelsa driving?

A. He had a white -- a little white

Ford.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1695

Q. What kind of Ford was it, do you

know?

A. Oh, one of those with the -- a

Mustang.

Q. So he had a Mustang?

A. They had two of them.

Q. All right.

A. James Earl.

Q. Okay. All right. Okay. If we

can -- and he was in the rooming house.

He -- at some point he had been in the

rooming house?

A. Ruelsa?

Q. Yeah.

A. Yeah.

Q. Was he supposed to rent a room?

A. Yeah, uh-huh. And he was supposed to

leave that stuff in that room.

Q. What was James' role there? What was

James supposed to have done?

A. All he was done is -- he went and

purchased the -- something -- binoculars, I

believe, or something to that effect that had

his fingerprints and stuff on them, and he

came back and gave them to Ruelsa. This is

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1696

the way I understand it because I obviously

wasn't right there. And then he told James

to go on to Atlanta and to stay at the place

that he had set up for Ray in Atlanta.

Q. Right. Okay.

A. And that's the last from -- what I

understand from Ruelsa, when I talked to him

later, Ray did just exactly what he was told.

Q. So he didn't -- he got out of the

area, and he did what he was supposed to do?

A. Yeah. He wasn't -- he wasn't

anywhere around there, I mean, as far as I

know.

Q. That's what you were told?

A. That's right.

Q. Yeah. That is what you understand.

Now, Warden Swenson --

A. Uh-huh. What about him?

Q. You're saying you knew Warden Swenson

down in Central America. What was Warden

Swenson doing down in Central America?

A. Well, I presume from what he had

indicated that he was on a -- on a vacation,

and he was going to look at some of the

prison operations and what have you in the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1697

Panama Canal Zone for the feds -- for the

federal people. I saw him at the Myan Hotel.

Q. Right. And did -- did he tell you

that he had -- where did he tell you he had

met James and decided upon James as a -- to

be the patsy?

A. He said that -- I said, well, what --

is this going to be just in and out type

thing, and then he said, no, I think Ruther

wants it blamed on certain elements or people

to flare things up. And I said, well, you

know, it doesn't make any difference to me

really one way or the other. And I said, how

long have you known Mr. Ruther. And he said,

for quite a long time. He said, in fact, I

know him a lot better than I wish I did.

That was one of his quotes, so I -- then

Raul -- Ruelsa told me that Swenson had set

this deal up for Ray to presumably cleverly

escape in a red truck, on a Sunday morning,

jump off of it, and Ruelsa was going to pick

him up, which I know that did happen.

Q. How do you know that happened?

A. Because he called -- Ruelsa called me

from Chicago and told me that things had gone

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1698

exactly as planned and that he was taking --

what did he call -- he never called him James

Earl. It's Jimmy, I think, or Jim -- I'm

taking him, and we're going to drive around

the country a while. And when things get

ready, I'll get back in touch. And -- but

that was the last I heard from that group

until they did get back and started trying to

set up some kind of base of operations, I

guess you'd call it, in Alabama or Georgia or

some place down there.

Q. Did Raul tell you what he -- Ruelsa

tell you what he -- he and James did during

the time after James escaped from prison?

A. He asked me if I wanted to know, and

I said no.

Q. Did he ever discuss with you how

James got his identities?

A. No.

Q. Okay.

A. Are you referring to the -- the

passports and that?

Q. No. The identity that he used when

he traveled around the country.

A. Oh, you mean as Willard and all

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1699

that?

Q. No. He only used one identity, not

Willard. He only used Willard at the very

end when he rented a room, but he had another

identity that he used when he traveled around

the country, always.

A. Well, I guess Ruelsa set him up with

it or somebody in New Orleans. I wasn't

familiar with it.

Q. Right. What was supposed to have

happened to James?

A. You mean after?

Q. Yeah. After everything.

A. Okay. He was supposed to go -- after

everybody had hit the fever pitch to Lisbon,

Portugal, where the UAW had a very, very

strong international union, and he was given

and told a room to go to in a hotel there.

And the way I understand it, when the people

went in there to get him, he wasn't there,

and I don't know how he picked up on it or

what, but the next thing, he's in England

someplace -- London.

MR. GARRISON: Page 69,

beginning on Line 18.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1700

(Continuing to read from the

deposition.)

Q. Do you believe that you were entirely

on your own in this operation?

A. With Ruther.

Q. With who?

A. Walter Ruther.

Q. With Walter Ruther. With the Union

League?

A. Now, I might have misspoken just a

minute when you asked me that question. Of

course, the way I understood it from Emil was

that Johnson had just lost his cool, so to

speak, as they do today, about King all of a

sudden in some New York or Chicago church

coming out just raising the devil about the

Vietnam War, and Johnson told Humphrey -- the

way I was told, because I wasn't there --

Q. Yes, of course.

A. -- go tell Ruther to tell that SOB to

shut his mouth. Now, the way Emil told me,

Ruther took that -- and don't forget, Ruther

had been a long time -- the UAW had really

pushed the civil rights.

Q. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1701

A. And so he was told this by Humphrey.

Q. Yes.

A. That apparently convinced Ruther

that -- that they had to do something pretty

quick. They had something set up called five

regionals.

In this particular scheme of things,

there were going to be five cities around the

country where there would be this union

organizing, vote organizing kind of

situation, and Memphis had been selected to

be the center of these things.

There was going to be one in New

York, obviously, Detroit, Chicago, L.A. and

Memphis, and that was what Ruther was

basically trying to protect, I believe, was

the fact that -- you know, his slogan was --

I don't know if you recall this or not or

read it, but was -- and I think it was a bad

choice of words -- was community-ized and

unionized.

MR. GARRISON: That's all.

THE COURT: Do you want to read

from the deposition?

MR. PEPPER: Yes, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1702

Plaintiff's don't want to tax or burden this

jury any more than absolutely necessary, but

just very briefly -- this is counsel's

deposition so I'm having to just quickly go

through it to find the one paragraph. Page

56.

Your Honor, plaintiffs concluded

that this deposition -- this statement is

a -- is disinformation, not to be believed,

for a variety of detail and accuracy.

Without burdening the jury, the one in

particular that concerned plaintiffs is on

Page 56.

Plaintiffs' counsel asked the

deponent --

Question: "Was there anyone else in

the brush area with you?"

Answer: " No."

Question: "And do you mind to tell

us what you were wearing."

Answer: "I had on blue jeans."

Question: "Yes."

Answer: "A blue shirt, a blue jean

jacket and some -- I never say this right --

tong or thong sandals."

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1703

Question: "Thong sandals?"

Answer: "Yes. I had been wearing

them in Tampa, plus they have pretty slick

bottoms."

Could Your Honor instruct please

that any mobile phones in this courtroom be

turned off.

"Yes, I had been wearing them in

Tampa, plus they have pretty slick bottoms so

you don't have to worry about them."

Question: "Was the area heavily

overgrown -- that brush area there?"

Answer: "Not particularly. It just

looked thumpy. I mean, it looked like a lot

of areas like that around Memphis. Right."

Question: "Do you know how

roughly -- how long it took you to get from

the gated area where you came in down to the

corner of the wall?"

Answer: "Two or three minutes."

Question: "Was there any impediment

that you faced as you walked to that corner

of the wall?"

Answer: "No, other than, you know,

some bushes and stuff. But no physical -- no

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1704

wire or any fence or anything like that."

Question: "You didn't encounter a

fence?"

Answer: "No."

Question: "That separated those two

pieces of property?"

Answer: "No."

(End of deposition testimony.)

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor, we're

putting up on the screen Plaintiffs' Exhibit

8 which is a photograph taken after the brush

area was cleared but at the same time in

1968, within a day or so, and it depicts,

quite clearly, a fence that runs east and

west separating the two pieces of property.

That's the subject of testimony here.

And in the right-hand corner, the

end of the fence as it goes straight down to

the edge of the wall. So, in fact, there was

quite a serious impediment, a fence

separating those two pieces of property which

this deponent claimed was not there. Nothing

further.

THE COURT: Mr. Garrison,

anything you want to read?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1705

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, I

have a deposition of Mr. Ray which is rather

lengthy.

THE COURT: All right. Let's

take a break and we'll get in a portion of

it.

(Brief break taken.)

THE COURT: All right,

Mr. Garrison.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, we

have Mr. James Earl Ray's testimony -- it's

going to be rather lengthy. It's going to

take two or three hours for that at least,

and I have testimony of a witness that's 40

pages, so it will be 30 or 40 minutes before

I can conclude with one of these.

THE COURT: Is this your way of

telling us you're ready to knock off and come

back Monday?

MR. GARRISON: Sorry. I didn't

say that, Your Honor. But it's going to take

quite a while to present Mr. Ray's testimony.

THE COURT: You're entitled to

put on your defense. Go ahead.

MR. GARRISON: Start with this

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1706

one?

THE COURT: However you want to

shape your proof, sir.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor,

Mr. Ray's testimony is rather lengthy and I

would rather it be heard all in one day

without it being broken up.

THE COURT: All right. We'll

look forward to starting next week with

that. And that will be the extent of your

proof?

MR. GARRISON: There may be one

other witness depending on whether or not I

can get service on the witness.

THE COURT: All right. All

right. What are we going to do now?

MR. GARRISON: I'm sorry.

THE COURT: What are we doing

now?

MR. GARRISON: I have one other

witness that's a 40-page deposition. If you

want me to read that I'll be glad to.

THE COURT: Whichever -- as they

say, whatever.

MR. GARRISON: I'm sorry, I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1707

didn't understand.

THE COURT: Whichever way you

want to proceed.

MR. GARRISON: I can present it

now. It will be rather lengthy. But if you

want me to go ahead, I'll be glad to.

THE COURT: You mean the Ray

deposition?

MR. GARRISON: No, sir, it's

another witness besides that. Almost 40

pages of it.

THE COURT: All right. Go ahead

and do that.

MR. GARRISON: All right. This

is testimony of Ms. Lavada Addison. And I

was present for Mr. Jowers and Dr. Pepper was

present for the plaintiff. These are the

questions that were asked of this witness,

Lavada Addison.

THE COURT: Please spell that

name.

MR. GARRISON: A D D I S O N,

L A V A D A. On Page 5 beginning with

Dr. Pepper's questions.

(Reading from the deposition.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1708

A. Mr. Pepper, the one thing I want to

clarify, when I gave the deposition to

Mr. Ashford --

Q. The statement?

A. A statement, rather. It wasn't a

deposition. He asked if I knew Mr. Liberto's

relatives, and I had met one of his nephews,

but at that time I did not recall his name,

but his name is Billy, and that I also told

him that Billy had something to do with

electrical, and I told him it was the

Coliseum, but it was the Convention Center

where he was working. I don't know if that

matters, but I want to clarify that.

Q. That's fine. Yes. I had discussion

with Mr. Ashford at one point about it, and

he did basically summarize what you know,

what you have said, with respect to

Mr. Liberto, and I gather in many ways it was

a limited -- in terms of the matters we're

concerned about, you really had very limited

contact with him or very limited

conversation.

A. Right.

Q. I'd just like to move forward on

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1709

that. Mr. Garrison may have some other

questions. He can take them up later.

Could you tell us where you worked

in 1967 and 1968?

A. Where I was in that period?

Q. Where you worked during that period,

A. In Millington.

Q. What was the name of the

establishment?

A. No, you are speaking of the early

1970's when I had the pizza parlor?

Lavada's.

Q. Could we just move back. Before you

had the pizza parlor, you worked during the

time in Millington?

A. Millington Telephone Company.

Q. Right. How long were you there?

A. Oh, off and on probably thirty-five

years or so.

Q. When did you go into the pizza parlor

or the restaurant business?

A. In 19 -- well, in 1975 I owned a

florist on the same corner where I had the

pizza parlor. Then I left my husband. I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1710

don't know if that makes any difference.

But, anyway, in 1976 is when I divorced him,

and then the latter part of 1976 is when I

opened the pizza parlor.

Q. All right. What was the address of

that pizza parlor?

A. 3411 Macon.

Q. 3411 Macon?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. What sort of food did you

serve there?

A. I had a hot breakfast, sausage,

biscuits, homemade gravy and so forth, then

we had a hot lunch, hot plate lunch. Mostly

in the evenings it was pizza.

Q. What were the hours of business?

A. Six in the a.m. until whenever.

Q. Very long day?

A. Right.

Q. Did you serve lunch as well?

A. Yes.

Q. And did you have a dinner menu, did

you serve dinner?

A. No, we just had a hot plate lunch.

Q. Just a hot plate lunch?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1711

A. Uh-huh. The kitchen was small. We

didn't -- we just had a hot lunch, and that

was it.

Q. Now, when did you first meet

Mr. Frank Liberto?

A. Probably in -- well, after I opened

the pizza parlor. He didn't come by when I

had the flower shop there. He sold me

produce. Then he came by for breakfast.

Then I had seen him down at the Scott Street

Market. He was what we call the tomato man

there. He sold a lot of tomatoes.

Q. Do you know the name of his company

on Scott Street during that time?

A. No. I don't remember. I just know

where it was located, but I don't remember.

Q. Would the name L & L mean anything to

you, Liberto & Latch Brothers?

A. No. You'd see the Liberto names down

there, but that didn't mean anything to me.

Q. So you met him in a business way, you

bought produce from him?

A. Right.

Q. Did he deliver produce to your

restaurant?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1712

A. Yes. Apparently he went to work

early in the morning, and he dropped my

tomatoes and different things off, and he

would eat breakfast while he was there. Then

after awhile he would eat and sit around and

talk for awhile like a lot of people did.

Q. All right. So he would come by

early. What hour of the morning would he

come by?

A. I'm just speculating. I'm going to

say somewhere around seven, somewhere around

there.

Q. Did he live nearby?

A. I don't know where he lived.

Q. When he came by early in the morning

and dropped off the produce, he had

breakfast?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. Did you cook breakfast for him?

A. Yes.

Q. Did he have a regular type of

breakfast that he had?

A. No. He didn't have a regular

breakfast. Mr. Frank was a big man. He was

like on a bland diet most of the time. He

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1713

would have like scrambled eggs and dry toast,

coffee, occasionally orange juice, and then

I'd fix oatmeal for him.

Q. Now, when you first met him, let's

put that in a time frame. Which year would

that have actually been?

A. I'm saying probably early 1977.

Q. Early 1977?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay.

A. Because he started coming by about

the time I opened the restaurant there, and

that was in 1977, the early part.

Q. Could you estimate his age at that

time?

A. No, I couldn't. I don't know.

Q. That's fair enough. It is very

difficult in some people.

A. He didn't have a lot of wrinkles. He

didn't have as many as I've got right now.

Let's put it like that.

Q. He'd come in and have breakfast, and

then he would go off to his place of

business. Would you see him every day?

A. Not every day. Most every day,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1714

though. And sometimes he would come back for

lunch. You just would look up, and there he

was. He didn't have a certain time that he

came in.

Q. He'd drop in for lunch. Did he ever

drop in in the afternoon on his way home or

after the business was closed?

A. Yes.

Q. What time would that be as a rule?

A. I don't remember. But I just

remember that he was smoking a cigar when he

came in and he would have like his dress

clothes on. When I say "dress clothes," he'd

have a sport shirt and pants. A lot of times

when he would come in, he would have his

overalls on, bib overalls. When he had on a

sport shirt, I considered that his dress

clothes.

Q. When he came in late in the afternoon

when he was on his way home, would he eat

then as well?

A. No.

Q. What would he do then? Did he

drink --

A. He would drink beer.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1715

Q. He would drink beer?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. And would he drink much beer or --

A. I don't recall. It has been so long,

seventeen, eighteen years ago.

Q. How long would he likely stay?

A. I don't remember. Just different

times.

Q. All right. Where would you -- would

you actually be serving him? Would you be

behind the counter serving him? How would

you interact with him?

A. Like in the early morning, if he had

produce on his truck, well, like the pizza

parlor was on the corner, and the door was

here in the corner of the building, and then

there was big windows over here and big

windows over here, and Mr. Frank would park

his truck right by these windows. And there

was a table next to the windows where he

would watch his produce. He would sit there

early in the morning.

Q. And would you serve him?

A. Yes. But it was like a family type

thing. After I served him, you just would

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1716

sit down and talk. It was like a round

table. Everyone would just gather around at

times.

Q. You gradually became involved in

conversation with him when he was around?

A. Right.

Q. You came to know him, actually?

A. Right.

Q. As a regular customer?

A. Yes.

Q. As you have many others, I'm sure.

Did you have other staff working in the

restaurant at that time?

A. Yes.

Q. Who were the other staff and what did

they do?

A. I had, well, the cook, and she is

dead now, by the way, Emma. I can't remember

her name. Then there was Lewis Monticelli,

he worked, Nathan, my son, worked. We had a

couple of waitresses, Thelma Smith, a

red-head, and there was another one, Annette

something. I can't remember her name.

Q. Now, I understand at one time, one

point in the course of your interaction with

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1717

Mr. Liberto when he was in your restaurant,

the killing of Martin Luther King came up.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did it come up more than once in your

presence or was it only one time?

A. Only one time.

Q. Only one time. And do you recall

when that was?

A. No, sir, I don't.

Q. The year?

A. No.

Q. What prompted the discussion?

A. I had a TV up in the front part of

the pizza parlor, and we were sitting at a

table, and something came on TV about Martin

Luther King, and I don't recall what it was.

But he said in a low voice to me, he said, I

had Martin Luther King killed. I said, don't

be telling me anything like that, I don't

want to hear it and I don't believe it

anyway. And I got up and walked away.

That's the only time he ever mentioned it and

I ever mentioned it to him either.

(End of deposition testimony

that was read into the record.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1718

MR. GARRISON: That's all I

have, Your Honor.

THE COURT: Do you have anything

to add to that?

MR. PEPPER: None. Nothing,

Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right. Next

order of business.

MR. GARRISON: The only other

thing I have is the testimony of Mr. Ray, and

I prefer to start it all in one day so the

jury wouldn't forget what they heard. It's

rather lengthy testimony.

THE COURT: All right. Monday

morning at -- what do we have? We'll just

start Monday at 10 then. Ladies and

Gentlemen, we'll resume Monday at 10

o'clock.

(Court adjourned unil Monday,

December 6, 1999, at 10 o'clock a.m.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1719

IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF SHELBY COUNTY,

TENNESSEE FOR THE THIRTIETH JUDICIAL

DISTRICT AT MEMPHIS

_____________________________________________

CORETTA SCOTT KING,

MARTIN LUTHER KING, III,

BERNICE KING, DEXTER SCOTT

KING and YOLANDA KING,

Plaintiffs,

Vs. Case No. 97242-4 T.D.

LOYD JOWERS, and OTHER

UNKNOWN CO-CONSPIRATORS,

Defendants.

_____________________________________________

TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

December 6, 1999

VOLUME XII

BEFORE: HONORABLE JAMES E. SWEARENGEN, Judge

_____________________________________________

_____________________________________________

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI,

RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

COURT REPORTERS

Suite 2200, One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

(901) 529-1999

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1720

- APPEARANCES -

For the Plaintiffs:

MR. WILLIAM PEPPER

Attorney at Law

575 Madison Avenue

New York, NY 10022

(212) 605-0515

For the Defendant:

MR. LEWIS GARRISON

MR. JOHN H. BLEDSOE

Attorneys at Law

Law Offices of Lewis K.

Garrison, Sr.

100 North Main

Suite 1025

Memphis, TN 38103

(901) 527-6445

Reported by:

SHERYL G. WEATHERFORD

Registered Professional

Reporter

Daniel, Dillinger,

Dominski, Richberger,

Weatherford

2200 One Commerce Square

Memphis, TN 38103

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1721

- INDEX -

WITNESS: PAGE NUMBER

LaVADA ADDISON

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON.......................... 1723

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER............................ 1727

DEPOSITION OF JAMES EARL RAY

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON.......................... 1731

EXHIBITS

Trial Exhibit 36 ......................... 1722

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1722

P R O C E E D I N G S

(Jury out.)

THE COURT: Yes, are we ready to

proceed?

MR. GARRISON: If I might have

just one second. May we approach?

THE COURT: Yes, sir.

(Off-the-record discussion held

the bench between Court and counsel.)

THE COURT: Bring the jury out,

Mr. James.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: Good morning, ladies

and gentlemen. It's gratifying to see that all

of you have survived another weekend. All

right. We are going to proceed with the trial.

Mr. Garrison, you may continue.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, at this

time I have a report from the physician on

behalf of Mr. Jowers. I would like to have it

marked the next exhibit if I may.

(Whereupon, the above-mentioned

document was marked as Trial Exhibit 36.)

MR. GARRISON: I would like to

call Miss LaVada Addison.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1723

LaVADA ADDISON

Having been first duly sworn, was examined and

testified as follows:

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Good morning, Miss Addison. Let me ask

you please, ma'am, to tell us your full name.

A. LaVada Whitlock Addison.

Q. You live here in Memphis, Miss Addison?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. I have known you many years?

A. Thirty-five or so I guess.

THE COURT: You spell LaVada, L

A --

THE WITNESS: L A capital V A D A.

Q. Miss Addison, you're in some type of

business presently, aren't you?

A. Yes, sir, I'm self-employed.

Q. What is the name of your business?

A. LaVada's Estate Sales. I sell contents

of homes.

Q. Previously you operated a restaurant

here in Memphis some years ago, am I correct?

A. That's right.

Q. And where was it located?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1724

A. At the corner of Macon and National.

Q. All right. Let me ask you this:

During -- how many years did you operate the

restaurant?

A. I opened it in 1976 and sold it in

either -- latter part of 1981 or the first part

of 1982.

Q. All right. Among those customers that

came in to see you, would you tell His Honor

and ladies and gentlemen of the jury was there

a Mr. Frank Liberto?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you get to know Mr. Liberto pretty

well?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Was he in on like a weekly basis? I'm

talking about after he started coming in, daily

basis, how would you describe it?

A. I would probably see him possibly four

or five times per week.

Q. And you and Mr. Liberto had some

conversations quite a bit, am I correct?

A. That's right.

Q. And some of these conversations would

be of things that happened in the past, am I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1725

correct?

A. That's right.

Q. Let me ask you this: Will you tell His

Honor and ladies and gentlemen of the jury was

there a time when there was some discussions --

I'm not asking you to tell me what he said

right now. But was there a discussion between

you and Mr. Liberto about the assassination of

Doctor Martin Luther King?

A. Yes.

Q. And was that some time after you got to

know Mr. Liberto pretty well?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. You had many conversations with him

about various things before then, am I correct?

A. That's right.

Q. Now, let me ask you this: What were

the circumstances that brought up the

assassination of Doctor King, do you recall?

A. We were sitting at -- well, we called

it a round table, but it really wasn't a round

table. It was just like two tables pushed

together and people would just kind of gather

around, drink coffee, and so forth. But at

that time there were -- just Mr. Liberto and I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1726

were the only ones sitting there. And the TV

was behind me and something came on the TV in

regard to Doctor King, and Mr. Liberto leaned

over to me and said in a low voice, I had

Doctor Martin Luther King killed.

Q. What was your response to that?

A. I said, don't be telling me anything

like that. I don't want to hear it, and I

don't believe it anyway.

Q. All right. Now, Miss Addison, all the

time you knew Mr. Liberto did you ever hear him

mention the name of Loyd Jowers to you?

A. No, sir.

Q. In fact, did you ever hear of

Mr. Jowers up until the last few months or

years?

A. No, sir.

Q. Okay. Did he ever tell you he was ever

in Mr. Jowers' restaurant? Did he ever mention

that to you, ever been in there?

A. No, sir, he never did.

Q. Is this the only time he had ever

mentioned that to you is that one time?

A. Yes, sir.

MR. GARRISON: That's all I have.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1727

THE COURT: Mr. Pepper.

CROSS-EXAMINATION

BY MR. PEPPER:

Q. Good morning, Miss Addison. Did you in

the course of your acquaintanceship with

Mr. Liberto, did you come to learn anything

about his family?

A. Somewhat.

Q. Did he have any children?

A. He never mentioned children --

Q. He never mentioned --

A. -- that I remember, no, sir.

Q. But he was married?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. All right. And so you didn't learn

from him or from any other source whether or

not there were any children in that family?

A. No, sir.

Q. After he made this statement about

arranging to have Martin Luther King killed,

did you see him again?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Many times?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Do you recall what year that was again?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1728

A. The only way I can remember when I

opened the pizza parlor, I took a little

photography course at Memphis State and I had a

dark room set up behind in the back of the

pizza parlor where I developed pictures. And I

started taking pictures of customers, and I

started -- like the pizza parlor was like

north, south, east and west. And I started on

the south end towards the kitchen putting them

on the walls, black and whites, and all the way

around the walls, and on the west side I would

say Mr. Liberto and his wife's picture was

there pretty well even with the cash register.

And that should -- and some of those pictures

were dated 1977 and some of them were 1978.

And so it had to be during that period of time.

Q. So it was 1977 or 1978 that you had

this conversation with him?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Was the television on in the cafe at

the time that you had that conversation?

A. Yes, sir, it was on the top of the

jukebox behind me.

Q. And once again what -- do you recall

what was being shown on the television?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1729

A. No, sir. I don't recall. But it was

something pertaining to Doctor King.

Q. Something pertaining to Doctor King?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Now, when you saw him again, would it

have been over the course of the next year?

Did you see him for two years after that, do

you recall how long?

A. Probably a year or so. I really don't

remember. I would just be guessing. I don't

know how long it was.

Q. Right.

A. As you get older, time doesn't mean as

much.

Q. Of course. Of course. And did he ever

raise this subject again with you?

A. No, sir.

Q. It never came up in conversation --

A. No, sir.

Q. -- with you at all. Do you recall when

he passed away?

A. I don't know what year it was. I do

remember the obituary being in the paper.

Q. Would it have been soon after you

perhaps saw him for the last time or do you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1730

think there was a gap there?

A. I think there was a gap there.

MR. PEPPER: There was somewhat of

a gap. Okay. That's all. Thank you very

much, Miss Addison.

MR. GARRISON: I have nothing

further, Miss Addison.

THE COURT: All right. You may

step down, ma'am. You can remain in the

courtroom or you are free to leave.

(Witness excused.)

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, at this

time we would like to offer the testimony of

Mr. James Earl Ray.

THE COURT: All right.

MR. GARRISON: Mr. Bledsoe will

read.

MR. BLEDSOE: This is the

deposition of James Earl Ray which was taken

March 11 and March 12th of 1995 in the case of

James Earl Ray versus Loyd Jowers. Appearing

for the plaintiff was Doctor Pepper.

Representing the defendant was Lewis Garrison.

Also present was Loyd Jowers and Jerry Little.

James Earl Ray having been first duly

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1731

sworn was examined and testified as follows and

his direct examination questioning by

Mr. Garrison.

(The following proceedings were

read by Mr. John H. Bledsoe from the deposition

of Mr. James Earl Ray.)

DIRECT EXAMINATION

BY MR. GARRISON:

Q. Mr. Ray, I'm Lewis Garrison, an

attorney out of Memphis, Tennessee, and I

represent Mr. Jowers seated next to me. You

filed a lawsuit against him as a defendant.

I'm going to ask you some questions, and I want

you to be sure that I -- you understand my

questions before you answer them. If there is

anything I ask you you don't understand, tell

me and I will be glad to repeat it or speak

louder or say it in a way where you understand

it.

A. Okay.

Q. If you will be sure and don't shake

your head. She has to write down what you say,

and if you will, give a complete answer because

she will have to put it on the record what you

say as to the court hearing. And if you will

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1732

give a complete answer, it will assist us in

knowing what you have testified to here today.

A. All right.

Q. Tell us your full name, sir.

A. James Earl Ray.

Q. Okay. And, Mr. Ray, I believe you were

born April 10th, 1928; is that correct, sir?

A. No. Let's see, March 10.

Q. I mean, March 10. I'm sorry, March 10,

1968 -- oh, 1928.

A. Yes.

Q. Yesterday was your birthday. Okay.

You're presently confined to the Riverview --

River Bend --

A. River Bend Maximum Security

Institution.

Q. Security institution. All right. How

long have you been there at this location?

A. Since March 1991.

Q. Now, Mr. Ray, if I'm not mistaken, I

believe you entered a guilty plea on March

10th, 1969, in Memphis, Tennessee; is that

correct, sir?

A. That is correct. Yes.

Q. And you have been confined since that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1733

time?

A. Yes.

Q. Let me ask you some questions, Mr. Ray.

You were born in Alton, Illinois; is that

correct, sir?

A. Yes.

Q. And you were the oldest of nine

children?

A. No, it was seven. A lot of these

records I don't know where you get them, but

they're not exactly correct.

Q. You're the oldest of seven children?

A. Yes.

Q. And your mother's name?

A. Lucille.

Q. Okay. I believe she died in 1961; is

that correct?

A. I believe so, yes.

Q. Did you grow up around Alton?

A. Did I grow up around Alton?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. Yes. But I really don't want to go

into too many of these personal questions that

doesn't have anything to do with the Martin

Luther King case.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1734

Q. Well, Mr. Ray, according to our rules

this is what is called a discovery deposition,

and we are permitted to go into pretty much

wide latitude, and I'm going to ask you some

questions and I would like you to answer them.

We'll let the judge decide whether or not they

are proper.

A. Yeah. Well, I am not getting into too

many personal questions. You can ask them. I

don't think I'm required to answer them.

Q. Okay. How far did you go in school?

A. Two years of high school.

Q. And what school did you last attend?

A. Well, I would rather not answer that

either.

Q. Okay. Can you tell me the first job

that you held?

A. It was at the International Shoe

Company, Hartford, Illinois.

Q. How old were you when you had that job?

A. Fifteen, I believe.

Q. Okay. What did you do for them?

A. Well, they just made leather materials.

I couldn't go beyond that.

Q. Okay. How long did you work there?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1735

A. I would say about sixteen or seventeen

months.

Q. Okay. And where were you living then

when you worked for International?

A. Alton, Illinois.

Q. Before you became 18 years old -- 18

years of age, had you been arrested for

anything?

A. No.

Q. After the International Shoe Company,

then did you enter the military service?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. What branch were you in?

A. I was in the Army.

Q. Okay. How long did you serve in the

Army?

A. Three years.

Q. Were you stationed overseas or were you

all in the United States all the time you were

serving?

A. Most of the time I was in Europe.

Q. Okay. You were I believe, Mr. Ray,

what is called an MP, is that correct, military

police?

A. No. I was in four or five different

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1736

organizations. I was in -- I started out in

the quartermaster for about seven or eight

months, and then I was in the military police

for eight or nine months. And then I was in

the infantry several months and I was

discharged. I was in the infantry at the time

I was discharged.

Q. How old were you when you were

discharged?

A. About 20 years old.

Q. Okay. And where were you discharged

from, what location were you discharged from?

A. I believe it was Camp Kilmer, New

Jersey.

Q. When you were discharged, where did you

go from there?

A. Well, I didn't go any certain place. I

know I was in Quincy, Illinois, for a while

after I was discharged.

Q. Did you have an employment there?

A. No, not at that time.

Q. Okay. When did you have your next

employment after you were discharged from the

service?

A. I don't believe I had any employment

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1737

after I was discharged from the service.

Q. You never were employed on any job at

all?

A. No. After you got out of the military,

they give you so much money every month for a

year.

Q. Okay. Did you continue living in

Quincy, Illinois, or did you go somewhere else

after that?

A. Well, I was in different places. I

can't recall them all because it's been a long

time. I lived in that general area, Quincy or

Alton, Illinois, generally in the St. Louis,

Missouri, area.

Q. Tell me the first time that you -- that

you were arrested and found guilty and served

time that you can remember?

A. The first time I think it was in 1949.

I would say about October of 1949.

Q. What state was that?

A. California.

Q. Did you have a trial or did you enter a

guilty plea?

A. No, I just entered a plea for attempted

burglary or -- I believe that's the charge.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1738

I'm not certain of that.

Q. How much time did you serve?

A. I was on probation for two years.

Q. Okay. Where did you serve your time or

you said you didn't serve time?

A. No, I was --

Q. All right. I'm sorry. And when you

were on probation, Mr. Ray, where were you

living?

A. Chicago, Illinois.

Q. Okay. Were you arrested any more after

that?

A. Well, I lived in Chicago for, let's

see, from 1950, the spring of 1950, until the

spring of 1952, and I was arrested for a

robbery in 1952. So I would say about May of

1952.

Q. That was in the state of Illinois?

A. That's correct. Yes.

Q. Okay. And what happened, did you --

were you convicted or did you plead guilty to

the charge of robbery?

A. Yes, I entered a guilty plea to the

robbery charge, yes.

Q. And did you serve time?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1739

A. Yes.

Q. How much?

A. Two years.

Q. Where did you serve it?

A. Pontiac, Illinois.

Q. Okay. Now, Mr. Ray, you lived in the

Chicago area you said from 1950 to 1952 and did

you have any type of employment during this

period of time?

A. Yes. I worked all the time I was up

there.

Q. Where did you work?

A. I can't remember all the places that I

worked. I worked about three different places.

When I was arrested, I was working in Borg

Ericson, E R I C S O N, they made scales.

Q. What is the name of it again?

A. Borg Ericson. B O R G, I believe it

was, Ericson and they were --

Q. And they're in Chicago?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. All right. Now, you had a

robbery charge. You entered a guilty plea.

You had two years in prison. And when you were

released, where did you go from there?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1740

A. I went to Quincy, Illinois.

Q. Okay. And did you work anywhere there?

A. No.

Q. Were you subsequently arrested any more

for anything after that?

A. Yes. I was arrested for burglary in

Alton, Illinois, in --

Q. Okay. And what happened to that

charge?

A. Well, I got out on bond, and I can't

remember the date now. It must have been 1955

I would guess.

Q. Okay. Did you enter a guilty plea or

were you tried -- have a trial?

A. I never was -- that case was I think

nolle prossed or whatever you call it.

Q. All right. And then after that what

happened to you?

A. I was arrested again. Subsequently I

was arrested for I think transporting state --

stolen documents across the state line.

Q. Okay. And what state was that in?

A. That was in Missouri. It was a federal

charge.

Q. And did you have any trial or enter a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1741

guilty plea on that?

A. I entered a guilty plea on that and

received three years -- and --

Q. Where did you serve your time?

A. Forty-five months in Leavenworth,

Kansas.

Q. After you were released from there,

where did you go next?

A. I was released from there in 1958 I

believe it was.

Q. Okay. Where did you move or where did

you live then?

A. Oh, I went to Saint -- yes, I went to

St. Louis, Missouri.

Q. Did you have any employment there?

A. No, I didn't.

Q. Okay. Who did you live with there,

Mr. Ray, anyone?

A. Well, I lived with myself mostly.

Q. Okay. Were you arrested any more then?

A. Yes. After about a year and a half

there, I was arrested for armed robbery, yes.

Q. Anyone arrested with you?

A. And car theft. Yes, someone, an

individual named James Owens.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1742

Q. Okay. And that was in the St. Louis

area?

A. Yes, that was in St. Louis, yes.

Q. All right. And what happened to that

charge?

A. Well, I went to trial on that charge,

and I received a 20 year sentence.

Q. Okay. Where did you serve your time?

A. At Jefferson City, Missouri. I never

did serve the complete sentence. I escaped

before time had expired.

Q. Okay. How much time did you serve

before you escaped?

A. Well, I guess about six and a half

years, something like that.

Q. Was this the -- in other words, this is

the time you actually escaped and you made --

in the bread truck; is that correct?

A. Yes. That's correct.

Q. Now, you had tried to escape or did

escape I believe or attempted to before that,

am I correct, sir?

A. Yes, twice, yes.

Q. Did you actually get out of the prison

compound on the other --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1743

A. No, I didn't.

Q. When you were in the prison in

Jefferson City, Missouri, I believe you worked

as a cook or in the bakery.

A. Yes, I had several jobs, but when I

escaped, I was working in the -- a section of

the bakery.

Q. You had had, Mr. Ray, I think some

training to mix dyes at some point, am I

correct, sir?

A. Well, that's when I was working for the

shoe company in 19 -- when I was in Hartford,

the job I mentioned previously in 1944 I

believe it was.

Q. Did you -- after you left there, did

you ever work anywhere in this type trade where

you were mixing dyes and those type things?

A. No, I haven't -- no.

Q. Okay. Now, what year did you escape

from -- the last time, in the bread truck?

A. Well, that would have been in 1967,

April.

Q. All right. Now, you -- I believe you

had left and you eventually made your way to

the Chicago area, am I correct?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1744

A. Yes. That's correct.

Q. How long did you stay there?

A. Well, I think a little over two months

I would say. Eight or ten weeks.

Q. When you were there two months,

Mr. Ray, did you work any place?

A. Yes, I worked in a restaurant in

Winnetka, Illinois, which is a suburb of

Chicago.

Q. Okay. And you were there about two

months?

A. Yes, approximately, maybe a little bit

longer. I'm not certain.

MR. BLEDSOE: And then Mr. Pepper

states: Excuse me, Miss Parks, if you have

problems with any of the spelling of any of the

names, please let us know. Resuming question.

Q. Okay. Mr. Ray, when you left the

Chicago area, where did you go then?

A. Well, after I accumulated a certain

amount of identification, I was -- I was

working under a false name of John L. Rayns.

Q. How did you spell that last name?

A. R A Y N S.

Q. Okay. Go ahead.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1745

A. After I left there, it was my

intentions to go to a foreign country. So I

had one more check coming so I went to Quincy,

Illinois, and I stayed around there eight or

ten days, I guess. I'm not certain just how

long.

Q. Okay. Mr. Ray, I want to back up a

moment here. Back in the time you were serving

in the last prison where you escaped from --

A. Yes.

Q. -- did you ever serve any time where

there was some black prisoners that you were

confined with?

A. Well, there's blacks in all prisons,

yes.

Q. But my question is, did you serve any

time in the area where there were black

prisoners?

A. Oh, yes, they're all mixed in.

Q. So your answer is yes, you did serve

where there were black prisoners integrated in

the area where you were serving -- where you

were in the cell, in that cell block; is that

correct?

A. Well, the cell blocks were segregated

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1746

but, you know, you're on the yard and things of

that nature.

Q. Okay. And was there one time when you

had a chance to be transferred -- I'm sure you

have been asked this before -- and you turned

it down because there were black people in the

area where you would be transferred in the cell

block area?

A. I was talking -- excuse me, are you

talking about Jefferson City?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. No, no, I think what you're talking

about is the Leavenworth, the Leavenworth

prison.

Q. Okay. Did that happen, just what I

just --

A. No, not necessarily it happened. At

the time I was in Leavenworth, I was due to be

discharged in about five or six months. And at

the time they offered to send me outside to

work in what they call the dormitories.

Q. Now we are talking about Leavenworth,

the federal prison.

A. The federal prison. I was inside the

walls and they offered -- I could go outside

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1747

and work in the dormitories and one of the

other prisoners told me that people had been

getting drug charges out there. If you get --

I think the procedure was if you were arrested,

if there was marijuana, I'm talking about

marijuana, if you were arrested, you could get

two years if you entered a guilty plea. If you

went to trial, you got ten years. And their

position was that, it seemed to me, the general

consensus was most of the blacks smoked

marijuana and the whites were drinking alcohol.

So I didn't want to go out there under those

conditions where everyone was mixed up in the

same dormitory room. So I didn't go out there.

Q. You turned it down?

A. Yes. It had nothing to do with any

race issue.

Q. Okay. When you were working in Chicago

at the restaurant, were there people of the

black race working there with you?

A. In Chicago? Just about all except me

and one other individual. I think there was

about -- there was about seven or eight there

in the restaurant and I think it was two

whites, me and another guy. And that's not

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1748

counting the waitresses. The waitresses, I

don't know about those, they worked out in

front.

Q. What was the reason you left that job

in Chicago?

A. What was the reason? Well, there was

several reasons. I just went to work there to

accumulate some money. When I escaped from the

Missouri prison, I had $250. I wanted to

accumulate some more money to where I could go

to Canada. Also I was concerned about -- I was

using one of my brother's Social Security

numbers and I was concerned that it might get

checked and find out that, you know -- I mean,

it wasn't me. So there really was no point in

staying there any longer. I accomplished what

I set out to do. I got the identification. I

got -- I made seven or eight hundred dollars

and so I was ready to leave.

Q. All right. What type of identification

did you get?

A. Well, when I escaped, I didn't have

nothing except the Social Security number.

Q. You had no card?

A. No, I didn't have the card.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1749

Q. Just a number?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Go ahead.

A. While I was up there, I purchased a car

and I got it underneath the Ryan name -- the

Rayns name.

Q. Okay. Was the Social Security card

issued to you in that name, is that what you

got?

A. The Social Security number?

Q. No. You said you got something. What

kind of identification did you get? Was it a

Social Security card, driver's license or what?

A. No. Well, when I escaped from prison,

the only identification I had was a Social

Security number. My brother, he had seven or

eight apparently, and he gave me one of them to

use.

Q. Okay.

A. So I went to work at the restaurant in

Winnetka, Illinois, I gave them my Social

Security number and my name as being John L.

Rayns. Subsequently about the identification I

purchased a car I think for a hundred dollars

under the Rayns name and I got a title, which

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1750

is, you know, identification.

Q. Okay.

A. And then I went and took the driver's

test and got a driver's license.

Q. That's in the state of Illinois?

A. That's the state of Illinois.

Q. What name did you use?

A. The John L. Rayns name.

Q. Is that the name you were working --

using at the restaurant, John L. Rayns?

A. Yes, John L. Rayns, yes.

Q. Okay. Had you ever used that name

before this?

A. No. As I mentioned, it wasn't really

one of my aliases. I just got that -- I

borrowed it from my brother.

Q. Okay. Mr. Ray, tell me the first alias

you used, if you recall, other than your real

name?

A. You mean to begin with all the way

back?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. That would be hard to say. I have used

quite a few of them.

Q. Well, tell me the first one you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1751

remember using.

A. Probably the first one I used was in

Mexico in 1955 I believe it was. I think I

used James, James O'Connor.

Q. James O'Connor?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, let me ask you something about

that. Did you have any kind of a Social

Security card, driver's license or anything

with that name on it ever?

A. No. At that period of time Social

Security cards were -- they were not good

identification. The purpose was not for

identification at that time. I know now they

are, but they wouldn't accept that type of --

Q. But did you ever have any kind of

identification, driver's license, title of

any -- of an automobile, anything with that

name on it?

A. What name is that?

Q. James O'Connor.

A. Apparently I did. I was -- if I

crossed the border with the car because I know

Mexican customs officials check your title and

your driver's license.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1752

Q. And you were in Mexico in 1955; is that

correct?

A. Let's see, what year was that? No,

that would have been -- no, it wasn't 1955. It

was 1959. That's when it was.

Q. All right. Did you ever actually know

anyone named James O'Connor?

A. I never did know anyone like that. I

know when I was arrested the detective's name

was that and he got kind of upset about it.

But I didn't use -- I didn't get it because it

was his name. I didn't even know him.

Q. Okay. Tell me the next alias you used

that you remember.

A. Well, I can't recall any more now. I

might use one in a motel, but I can't recall

something I would use over night or something.

Probably the only ones that I can recall

subsequently was -- is the ones I used after I

escaped from the Missouri prison.

Q. Well, okay. Let's go back when you

were in Los Angeles, what name did you use out

there?

A. I think I used my regular name, James

Ray.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1753

Q. When you were going through bartending

school, what name did you use?

A. Now you're talking about Los Angeles?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. In 1949 or just this last time?

Q. When you were going through bartending

school.

A. Well, I was using the name Eric S.

Galt.

Q. And did you have any identification

with that on it?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. And what identification did you have,

driver's license, Social Security, anything

else?

A. Driver's license. And in Alabama they

have what you call a bill of sale for an

automobile and I had some other cards and

things of that nature to supplement the

driver's license.

Q. Now, before you use the name of Eric

Galt, what other names had you used, aliases,

that you remember before that?

A. Well, after I escaped I used the name

John L. -- John L. Rayns and that's the only

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1754

one I used.

Q. That's the only one you've ever used?

A. Well, that's the only one I used -- no,

I used some after the Galt name but that --

Q. Okay.

A. The first time was Rayns and then I

went from Rayns to Galt.

Q. Okay. All right. Now, we are at the

point where you had lived in Chicago and worked

at a restaurant under the name of John L. Rayns

for two months. Where did you go when you left

there?

A. Well, as I mentioned earlier, I went to

Chicago. I was working on a check. I had a

check due and I stayed around. I left Chicago

and went to Quincy, Illinois, for eight or ten

days.

Q. All right. And you had a car at that

time; is that right?

A. Yes, I had a car.

Q. And you bought the car in the name of

John L. Rayns?

A. Yes.

Q. And you lived in Quincy. How long did

you live there?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1755

A. Well, I stayed there eight or ten days.

Q. We are looking at 1967, about that

time; is that correct?

A. Yeah. That would be around late June

or early July of 1967, yes.

Q. Okay. Mr. Ray, when you -- before you

escaped, was there times when you and some of

the other people that were there with you had a

discussion about Doctor Martin Luther King?

A. No, I don't have no recollection.

Q. You never discussed it with anybody?

You never even heard his name called all the

time you were in prison before you escaped?

A. If I did, I don't have no recollection

of it. I mean, there is all sorts of people,

you know, their names might come up but you

don't have -- since you're not interested in

them, you wouldn't have no recollection of

them. At that time we didn't have no

televisions or radios or things of that nature,

so...

Q. Are you aware of the fact that -- I

know you are because you have been at this a

long time -- that there are prisoners who gave

affidavits saying you did talk about Doctor

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1756

Martin Luther King. You are aware of that,

aren't you?

A. I have read some of these affidavits

and I think there is one person that testified

to that. I know he was -- I know he was an

informant so I assume he just made up the

story. But I have read some of the statements.

I got the Congressional committee that

investigated the Martin Luther King case in

19 -- when was it?

MR. BLEDSOE: Doctor Pepper states

19 -- 1977, 1978.

A. Yes, 1977, 1978. I got some of those

statements and I think it was just one

individual that said that I ever mentioned

Martin Luther King.

Q. Was that true?

A. No, he was -- like I say, he was an

informant, and he wasn't in the Missouri prison

anyway. I think he was -- yes, he was in the

Missouri prison, but I think he checked in what

he is called protective custody after he said

that.

Q. Let me ask you this: Did you ever

discuss the assassination of President Kennedy

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1757

with any of the people while you were in the

prison before you escaped?

A. I have no recollection of any convicts

ever talking about him. It might have been

maybe one or two days or something, but usually

if you're in the penitentiary, you have other

things that concern you, personal things rather

than politicians.

Q. Well, when President Kennedy was

assassinated, were you in prison then?

A. Yes, I was in the Missouri prison.

Q. How did you learn about it?

A. I think someone told me or something.

Probably come by the cell and told me because

as I mentioned we didn't have -- we did have

ear phones in one station but we didn't have

access to too much news.

Q. Okay. Did you ever have any discussion

with any of the prisoners or anyone else that

if someone assassinated Doctor Martin King,

they would make a lot of money?

A. Did I ever have any questions? No, I

never have.

Q. You never had any discussions before

the assassination of Doctor King with any

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1758

person?

A. No.

Q. Now, you're aware again of the

affidavit that's been given stating that you

did say that?

A. I haven't seen these, all these

affidavits. I have seen one of them -- this --

an individual who was -- gave a story to the

Ebony magazine I think. I can't think of his

name but I know his -- there's 15 or 20 of

these affidavits. In all of them one party

says one thing and one says another.

MR. BLEDSOE: And Doctor Pepper

states: Counsel, you have any particular

affidavits you would like Mr. Ray to review?

Mr. Garrison: Not at the moment.

A. But --

Q. Go ahead.

A. But most of these are convicts. If I

drop dead today, you could probably go out here

and get a hundred affidavits saying that I

confessed to killing Martin Luther King. So I

don't put too much credibility in what

informants say.

Q. Okay. The person that you have seen

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1759

the affidavits, was that person that you were

in a cell with or close to when you were

serving? Do you know the name of the

individual?

A. Well, first, I celled alone. I didn't

cell with anyone when I was there. I was in a

single cell most all the time I was in the

Missouri prison. I think maybe three or four

months I was in with another individual, but I

preferred a cell to myself so I usually celled

in a single cell. I can't think of this

individual's name. He was in Leavenworth when

I came -- when I went there, but I think they

transferred him to another place because he was

informing against these accomplices. That's

when I went to Leavenworth in 1955. And I

can't think of anyone else that's made these

affidavits.

Yes, that's his name, Ray Curtis. I

can't think of anyone else that made a hostile

affidavit against me except the one James

Bradley. He said something about he thought I

was dealing in drugs but that doesn't have

anything to do with the Martin Luther King

case. But I have never seen any affidavits

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1760

where -- saying that I mentioned Martin Luther

King.

Q. Tell me, Mr. Ray, when and where you

first met a gentleman named Raul?

A. That would have been in Montreal,

Canada, in July of 1968.

Q. Okay. Where did you meet him?

A. A place called the Neptune Bar in

Montreal, in east Montreal.

Q. Okay. Had you ever been in the Neptune

Bar before this day that you met him?

A. I could -- before I met him there I

possibly could have been there once or

something because I was in that general area.

Q. Had you ever been in Montreal before

this time?

A. Yes. I had been in Montreal another

time, yes.

Q. How long had you been in Montreal?

A. Before that or that or this?

Q. When you met him, how long had you been

in Montreal?

A. I really hadn't been there very long.

I can't tell you just exactly how many days.

Q. Are we looking at days, weeks, months

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1761

or what?

A. Yes, it would be days. Yes.

Q. You left Chicago and had gone to

Quincy, Illinois, and how long did you stay

there?

A. Where?

Q. Quincy, Illinois.

A. Probably eight or ten days.

Q. And then where did you go?

A. I went to Montreal from there. I went

back to Chicago and got a check and then I went

to Montreal.

Q. All right. You drove an automobile to

Montreal?

A. Yes.

Q. When you got to Montreal the first

time, is this the first time you had been

there, ever been to Montreal?

A. No. I had been there before.

Q. When were you there before this?

A. 1959.

Q. And how long did you stay in Montreal

in 1959?

A. I stayed -- I think I stayed there

about three weeks.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1762

Q. Do you remember where you stayed?

A. I can't remember the place. I know I

stayed fairly close to the train station.

Q. Now, between 1959 and this time had you

been in Montreal any more?

A. No, that was it.

Q. And what was your purpose in going to

Montreal?

A. In 1959?

Q. The last time. This last time you were

up there when you -- after 1959, the next time

you were in Montreal what was your purpose in

going there?

A. The last time you're talking about?

Q. Well, you were there in 1959 and you

said you were back again. That's where we are

right now.

A. In 1959 I was -- the police was after

me in 1959.

Q. All right.

A. Of course, they was after me again in

1968, too, but it was different circumstances.

Q. But you -- from 1959 you had never been

back in Montreal until 1968?

A. No, I hadn't.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1763

Q. In 1968 what did you go to Montreal

for?

A. Well, I assumed the FBI or the police

were after me at that time in connection with

the Martin Luther King, Jr., homicide.

Q. Okay. What made you think that?

A. Well, I would have to go -- to explain

that I would have to go back to where I was on

April 4th, 1968.

Q. Okay. Where were you on April 4th,

1968?

A. I was in Memphis, Tennessee.

Q. And what made you think they were after

you?

A. Well, this is sort of a complicated

thing. I will start April 3rd -- well, anyway

in April. I won't go over all the details on

April 3rd. Anyway I met this individual named

Raul on April 3rd in a motel called The Rebel,

the New Rebel motel I think it was. And he

asked me to -- we had been involved in other

things which I won't get into and he asked me

to meet him at a place he wrote down on a

paper, I think it was Jim's Grill, the next

day. He gave me the address, I think it was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1764

422 and a half Main.

Now, on April -- that was on April

3rd. I do recall it was raining that night.

Now, on April 4th that time I had a rifle also

with me when I was -- on April 3rd, and I

turned that over to him on April -- that night.

Then on April 4th I think I was

supposed to meet him there at Jim's Grill

probably about 3:30. Now, on April 4th I

checked out of the motel, I would just guess

about 11 o'clock or whenever they ring you out

of them places. And I was -- it was too early

to go to -- you know, to have this meeting set.

So I just more or less stalled around. And

I -- on the outside of Memphis, the outskirts

of Memphis I would say. I had a -- I was

getting ready to come back and have this

meeting and I had a flat tire so I had to fix

it.

Q. Where were you when you had the flat

tire?

A. It was somewhere south of Memphis. But

I'm not certain just where it was at.

Q. Okay.

A. So I changed the tire myself. I know

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1765

it was outside. It was probably in Mississippi

is probably where it was at, right outside of

Memphis. So anyway I changed the tire and then

I went to -- drove into Memphis proper. And I

would say about ten or twelve blocks from

downtown I drove into a parking lot and I was

going to leave the car there and find out, you

know, this address. And the parking lot

attendant -- I asked, I asked him about the

address and he said something about it was

uptown or I think I -- I think what I asked him

specifically was where was uptown at. So --

Q. Had you ever been to Memphis before

this?

A. No, I never had been there, no. So I

did -- I walked uptown and went -- I could see,

you know, the high-rise buildings up there, and

I asked a policeman where this address was and

I had it wrote down. And he gave me general

directions.

Well, I got on South Main Street and I

went into a bar on the right side. I think it

was -- I don't know if I'm -- I could be

mistaken but I think it was Jim's something.

Whether it was or not anyway, I went in there.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1766

Now this is on the right-hand side of the

street going south, and I asked him about this

address and he said -- it was a woman. She was

tending bar and she said that it was down the

street on the left a block or so.

And while I was in there, there was

two individuals in there. I thought maybe they

were what appeared to be watching me. So when

I went in the place, I usually buy, you know,

something, a sandwich or a bottle beer. But I

don't drink beer, but I buy it. You know, you

just can't go in there and ask a bunch of

questions and sit around.

So when I left there, when I got to

Jim's Grill I was supposed to meet Raul in

this Jim's Grill, and he wasn't in there. But

these two individuals was. And I -- you know,

I was kind of concerned anyway because we was

dealing in rifles and things of that nature.

So anyway Raul wasn't there. So I

thought I would go get the car, the Mustang,

where I parked it in the parking lot and drive

it back up to the -- park in that general area

of Jim's Grill.

So I went back and got the Mustang and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1767

parked it, and I don't think I parked right

directly in front of Jim's Grill. It's my

strong recollection I parked it about ten or

fifteen feet south of where you -- where the

door is. And when I went in this time Raul

wasn't -- he was in there this time, and we

had -- we had a brief discussion, and I think

he asked me where I was at. He seemed mainly

interested in the Mustang.

So when we went out the door, he

wanted me to rent a room upstairs he said. So

anyway we went out the door. I pointed the

Mustang out to him because he was concerned

that I had it there. And so I went upstairs

and rented a room, and I don't know where he

went. He could have went back in Jim's Grill.

He could have sat in the Mustang. He had a set

of keys to the Mustang.

And after I was up there a short

while -- well, first I went and seen the

individual that rented the rooms. And to the

best of my recollection, I walked up and turned

right. And I walked down a small foyer I guess

it was and I turned -- came up the steps and I

went through and seen -- I went to the office.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1768

And the lady up there, I subsequently learned

her name was Bessie Brewer. I told her I would

like to rent a room for a week I think it was,

and so she had two rooms.

So she showed me two different rooms.

One of them was a sleeping room and one of them

was some type of room where you cook in. So I

told her I was just interested in a sleeping

room. So she rented me the sleeping room.

So after I had been up there, I wasn't

up there too long, Raul had come up there and

he -- we started talking, and he said that we

might be around there two or three days, a

couple of days, and he said, I should bring in

my clothing and everything I had and put it in

the room. So -- but I didn't do that. I think

I mentioned to him or that the -- you know, the

place was a wino's place because I could tell

that. I had been familiar with them type of

establishments.

But there was no door handles on the

door. They had a strap on them and they had a

strap on their door. So -- but I did bring an

overnight case up there, and I think I brought

a -- something else up there, something to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1769

sleep on or something. I think it was a sheet

or something.

So after we was up there a few minutes

and was talking about just general things, he

asked me to go down the street and check on a

pair of infrared binoculars. So he told me

generally where it was at. It was down the

street on the right somewhere. So anyway I

started. I looked for it, but I couldn't

locate the place. I think -- I believe this is

about 4:30 probably when I first rented the

room, the time I rented the room.

Anyway, I couldn't locate the place so

I came back up and asked him more specific

directions. So he told me more specific, but I

don't think I walked far enough I think is what

happened. So I went back and I asked the guy

about the infrared binoculars, and he inferred

that I would have to get them at the Army

surplus. He said he just had binoculars but he

said he didn't have any attachments to put on

them where you could see at night.

So anyway I just got -- I just

purchased the binoculars, what he showed me,

and I went back to the room and I just more or

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1770

less set them on the bed and told Raul that if

he wanted the infrared, he would probably have

to get them through the military surplus.

So I hadn't eaten in a while -- in

quite a while by that time so I -- I had missed

lunch on account of having a flat tire so I

went back down to the -- I told him I was going

down to eat and I went down to a place

called -- I subsequently learned -- a policeman

told me it was the Chickasaw Restaurant. I

think he sat on the corner. I believe he said

it was underneath a hotel, and I don't know

what I ate there, ice cream or something. I

know I ate. And I recall -- apparently it was

the manager. He was instructing the --

apparently a new employee, a young black lady,

how to operate the cash register.

So anyway when I -- I stayed around

there a few minutes, I guess five or ten

minutes and I was back to the rooming house and

I -- I possibly -- I sat in the car a little

while, in the Mustang, before I went back up to

the rooming house. I have some recollection of

sitting in the Mustang.

So anyway, when I went back up to the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1771

rooming house, Raul, he was up there and he

suggested -- you know, he was going to meet

with some people later on that evening, and he

suggested that I go to a movie or do something

and not come back for a while. So I left there

and went back downstairs and I crossed the

street and went about two blocks up, and I

stopped in a restaurant. And I just more or

less sitting there, I think I had a beer or

something, and I was going to a movie. And

then I got to thinking about having a flat tire

earlier that day so I thought I would get it

fixed.

So I drove back -- I walked back down

to the rooming house, and got the Mustang and

then I pulled out of the -- waited in front of

the -- this Jim's Grill, and I don't know just

how far I drove. I may have drove three or

four or five or six blocks. But after driving

several blocks, I turned right and I think I

went either one or two blocks down there and I

turned right again. It was my intention to try

to get the tire fixed and then go park right

where I was.

I stopped at one service station and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1772

he said something about it was a busy time and

where he couldn't do it at that time. He was

busy, and I think there was another service

station on another corner, I'm not certain if I

went over there or not. I possibly could have

but I wouldn't testify to it under oath or

swear to it.

But anyway I went on back after this,

the attendant said couldn't fix it. I went --

kept going on south and I turned right and went

up to Main Street and I was going to turn right

again. Well, when I got to Main Street, I

noticed -- I looked down Main Street, and it

looked like three or four individuals or

policemen was running around down there, and I

think -- and I believe a squad car or a police

car was parked in -- blocking off the

intersection or blocking off the street or

something. It looked like he was waving

around, waving his hands around and possibly

waving people off.

So I just turned left instead of

turning right and I entered an area. It

appeared to be kind of a rundown area. It was

a lot of -- I think it was probably what you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1773

call a black neighborhood. So I drove real

slow through the -- slow through this

neighborhood and finally I come out on Main

Street, and it was my intentions to -- I had a

phone number in New Orleans, it was Raul's

number.

It was my intention once I got down

there to get on the outside of Memphis, maybe

three or four miles and call him up and ask

him, you know, if there was anything going on

down there because I know there was at least

one gun down there. I assumed there was one

gun down there and I tried to find out if the

police had raided the place.

So I would say about 15 minutes, I'm

not positive on this, they said that, there was

a bulletin that came over the radio saying that

Reverend Martin Luther King had been shot. So

I didn't pay too much attention to that. Just

I kept on driving, and it wasn't too long after

that it said -- I guess I was fairly close to

the edge of town. It said they were looking

for a white man in a white Mustang in

connection with the shooting of Reverend King.

So I decided then I would, you know,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1774

get out of Dodge, so to speak. So instead of

making any phone calls, I just kept going south

into Mississippi. And the first -- the first

highway I came to and made a left turn, I made

a left turn and then went -- and then I went on

to -- I returned -- from there I went on into

Atlanta and then from Atlanta I went to Detroit

and then back to Canada.

Q. Okay. Let me, Mr. Ray, back up now.

You had left Quincy, Illinois, to go to

Montreal. That was in 1967 I believe you said.

How long did you stay up there before you left?

A. How long did I stay in Montreal?

Q. We are talking about 1967, after you

had escaped.

A. Yeah. I would say about 30 days.

Generally 30.

Q. Is this when you met Raul that first

time you were there?

A. Yes, sir, that was in 1967, yes.

Q. Okay. Do you remember where you were

living up there in Montreal? Were you living

in a motel or a boarding home or how were you

living?

A. It was sort of an apartment complex. I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1775

think it was the -- I can't think of the name

of it. It was in south Montreal, what they

call the French section.

Q. And all the money you had at that time

was the money you had been paid at the

restaurant; is that correct?

A. No. That isn't correct. I escaped

with two hundred fifty dollars and at the

restaurant I made seven or eight hundred

dollars. Of course I purchased another car.

The car I purchased broke down and I had to buy

a Plymouth. I think when I got to Montreal, I

don't know how much I had, but I didn't have

too much.

Q. How much did you pay for the Plymouth?

A. A hundred and ninety-five dollars I

believe it was. Now, what I did in Montreal

the first day I was there, the fact is I set

the thing up before the day I moved into

Montreal. I held up -- at the time what you

call The Expo was there, The International

Exposition, and I robbed the brothel and I got

about seventeen or eighteen hundred dollars out

of it.

Q. Did you have a gun?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1776

A. Yes, I did.

Q. Where did you get the gun?

A. I had a .38 which I had purchased in

Birmingham, Alabama.

Q. Now, you have lost me. I thought you

had gone from Quincy, Illinois, to Montreal?

A. I had. But I had purchased the .38 --

no, wait a minute. That's -- that was another

gun I had. The -- we get out of sequence and

you get things mixed up. When I quit the job

in Montreal in --

Q. Chicago?

A. In Winnetka, Illinois, and went to

Quincy I went back to Chicago and got my check

and then I came to East St. Louis. I was going

to see my brother and I was going -- before I

left the country, I was going to arrange for

help and get him help, post office box and

things where I could write him.

Q. Which one of your brothers?

A. This was John Ray.

Q. All right.

A. I had another brother in Chicago and

his name was Jerry Ray. I used the -- most of

my contacts were around the St. Louis area.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1777

Q. How did you get the gun?

A. Well, there was a guy name Jack Gawron,

he was the -- I didn't know at the time but he

was an FBI informant.

Q. And where was he located?

A. Well, he lived in St. Louis. He lived

in St. Louis.

Q. All right. And how did you get in

touch with him?

A. Well, he didn't have no telephone, but

he had a bar where he took -- he took the

phones. He is in and out of this bar all the

time, and I called this bar and I made

arrangements for him to come and meet me in

East St. Louis, Illinois.

Q. How did you find out you could buy a

gun from him?

A. I didn't buy no gun from him. I knew a

fence in Madison, Illinois, so...

Q. What was your purpose in meeting

Mr. Gawron, Jack Gawron?

A. When did I first meet him?

Q. No, sir. I said what was your purpose

in meeting him?

A. Well, I was going to give him a message

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1778

to give to my brother John Ray.

Q. All right.

A. I was going to see John, but I thought

maybe the police had him under surveillance, so

my brothers knew Gawron for a long time and

they trusted him and everything. They were in

the penitentiary with him in Illinois in Minard

Prison.

So anyway the Gawron, we went to

Madison and at that time I didn't have enough

money really to buy a gun. So he said he was

going to take it care of it and I guess he did

and I think he got --

Q. When you went to Madison, did you drive

your car or did he ride with you or did you

ride with him?

A. No, he couldn't -- he didn't have no

car.

Q. So he rode with you?

A. Yes, he rode with me.

Q. How far did you go with him? How many

miles did you drive?

A. From East St. Louis to Madison it's a

short distance. I would say it's about six or

seven miles.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1779

Q. Now, you -- who gave you his name? How

did you get acquainted with him, Jack Gawron?

A. Well, as I mentioned he knew my

brothers and he served time with them in Minard

Prison. Well, he got out on parole in 19 -- he

got out on parole in 19 -- I'm trying to think

when he got out on parole. When I got out of

Leavenworth, he got out of parole after I did.

Q. What was he there for in prison?

A. Apparently murder. He was on a life

sentence and he was -- he got out on parole

and that would have been 1955. At that time I

was selling wine. I was what they call

bootlegging and I met him -- well, my mother

she -- he came to see her and tell her, you

know, about my brothers, how they were getting

along, and I met him at her house.

Q. Now, when you were bootlegging, was

that before you were arrested to this last

sentence or was that before you escaped?

A. No, that was after I got out of

Leavenworth.

Q. Okay. That was between then and the

time you went back in for your last sentence

where you escaped.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1780

A. Yes.

Q. For robbery.

A. Yes. That would have been 1958, 1959,

yes.

Q. Okay. And where were you living when

you were bootlegging?

A. At that time I was living right on the

edge of more or less a wino neighborhood, but I

can't think of the name of the street. I

believe it was Lafayette Street.

Q. Was it in Quincy?

A. No, that was in St. Louis.

Q. Okay.

A. Lafayette Street in South St. Louis.

Q. Okay. Well, how did you know where he

was located and where to get in touch with him?

A. At that time?

Q. When you went with him to get a gun?

A. Well, as I mentioned, he didn't have no

telephone and I knew where he lived. But he

took messages at a bar. He was in most of the

time and they would give a message to him, and

I left a message with him, you know, where to

meet me.

Q. And he met you?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1781

A. Yes, he did.

Q. And he took you somewhere to East St.

Louis?

A. No, he -- yes, I met him in East St.

Louis. I gave him the name of a bar or

whatever.

Q. And he told you he would help you get a

gun or where to --

A. Well, I knew where to get the gun at.

I just took him down there and, you know, to --

he was going to pay for it after I left.

Q. Okay. How did you know where to get a

gun?

A. Well, I had dealt with this guy several

times before in 1954 and 1955.

Q. He was in St. Louis?

A. No, he was in Madison. He was a fence

in Madison.

Q. So had you bought guns from him before?

A. Yes, I had bought -- yes.

Q. Okay. And this gentleman, Gawron, rode

over there with you and you bought a .38?

A. Yes.

Q. From someone there in Madison?

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1782

Q. Now, where did you go from there?

A. Well, then I went -- from there I went

to -- I think I went to Indianapolis, Indiana.

Q. Okay. What did you go there for?

A. Well, I was on my way to Canada.

Q. When is the first time, Mr. Ray, you

were ever in Alabama, what year was it?

A. It would be 1967.

Q. It was after you escaped?

A. Yes. That's after I come back from

Canada. It would be August of 1967.

Q. You were in Alabama?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. And what was -- did you spend

any time in Alabama in any city the first time

you were there?

A. Well, all the time I was there I was in

Birmingham. I was just there one time.

Q. Okay. And what did you go to

Birmingham for in 1967?

A. Well, when I met Raul in Montreal,

he -- I'm leaving out some testimony. There

was other things I done. I'm just going to

stick with him. I'm not going to go into other

things I have done.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1783

We made an arrangement to -- he was

going to get me a passport. I was trying to

get a passport. He called them traveling

documents if I would help him take certain

things across the border in my Plymouth I had.

And I agreed to do this and I did take some

stuff, some material across the border in the

back seat of my car in July of -- I guess it

would be in August of 1967.

Q. Okay.

A. Well, at that time he claimed he didn't

have no passport, but he did give me about

sixteen or seventeen hundred dollars. And

before that we agreed to go to meet in

Birmingham. Initially he wanted us to meet in

Mobile. And then I said, you know, I would

rather meet in a bigger town. But actually it

wasn't my intention at all -- once I got the

passport and some money, I intended to go back

to Canada and leave the country. But I didn't

get the passport and I didn't get -- but I did

get the money and so I did, you know, agree

to -- I met him there.

Q. And that was the first time to be in

Birmingham though? What was -- that was your

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1784

first time to ever be in Birmingham?

A. That's correct.

Q. The state of Alabama, period?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. When was the first time you were

ever in Atlanta in the state of Georgia?

A. Well, that's the first time I had ever

been there.

Q. On that same time?

A. Well, I was in -- I was in Atlanta --

no, I was in Atlanta -- in 1968 is the only

time I have ever been there. Now, one

exception is in 1955 I worked briefly for my

uncle and I went down there one time. I went

down to Florida one time, and he was -- he was

supposed to get a job down there. And we was

just down there three or four days. So I went

through the southern states. That's the only

time I have ever been through the southern

states.

Q. What was your uncle's name?

A. What?

Q. What was your uncle's name?

A. William Maher, M A H E R. We just

drove through there. It wasn't no overnight

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1785

stay or nothing. So I am not certain, I could

have -- in 1955 I could have been through some

of those towns but I have no recollection of

which town I went through.

Q. All right. Now, you had gotten a .38

in Madison and Mr. John Gawron was with you.

Where did you go from there?

A. I went to Indianapolis, Indiana.

Q. How long did you stay there?

A. Just over night.

Q. And then where?

A. I went to Detroit.

Q. And how long did you stay there?

A. I think what happened I was getting

kind of short on money. I think I slept in the

car one night. And I went to Detroit, and I

don't think I stayed there. I think I crossed

over and went right straight on into Canada. I

can't account for every day. And somewhere

in -- somewhere in Canada I think I slept in

the car maybe again. And then the first time I

rented a motel was in Dorion which is right

outside of Montreal. That's D O R I O N, I

believe is the way it is spelled. It's about,

like I say, three or four miles from Montreal.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1786

Q. Mr. Ray, after you got the .38 in

Madison, did you have any -- did you hold up

any place or rob anyone or take any money from

anyone before you got to Montreal?

A. No, I didn't, no.

Q. All right. Then you -- eventually --

then you eventually did get to Montreal, right?

A. Yes.

THE COURT: Let's stop here and

take a break, please.

(Brief recess.)

(Jury out.)

THE COURT: Bring the jury out,

please, sir.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: Mr. Garrison.

MR. GARRISON: We are going to

continue reading Mr. Ray's deposition.

THE COURT: All right.

(Whereupon, the following is the

continuation of the reading of the deposition

transcript of James Earl Ray.)

MR. BLEDSOE: Resuming the

deposition.

Q. Mr. Ray, after you got the .38 in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1787

Madison, did you have any -- did you hold up

any place or rob anyone or take any money from

anyone before you got to Montreal?

A. No, I didn't. No.

Q. All right. Then you eventually did get

to Montreal, right?

A. Yes.

Q. And that was in 1967?

A. Yes.

Q. About what month would that have been?

A. That would be sometime in July. I

imagine the latter part of July.

Q. And you had a what model Plymouth?

A. A 1962.

Q. Two door or four door?

A. I don't really -- I believe it was two

door, yes.

Q. What color was it?

A. I believe it was red.

Q. Did you know anyone in Montreal then?

A. No, I didn't.

Q. And what was your purpose in going to

Montreal, what did you intend to do when you

got there?

A. I tried to get some travel documents

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1788

and leave the country.

Q. Now, how long had you been there when

you met Raul at this Neptune Bar?

A. It was just days after I had been

there. It hadn't been over I would say --

Q. A week, less than a week, more than a

week?

A. It probably was a week or six to seven

days. It wasn't -- I wouldn't want to get

pinned down on just how many days.

Q. Tell us something about this Neptune

Bar. What did it look like? Is it a big open

space or was it a very small bar where you go

to sit-up at the counter or can you describe it

for us.

A. Well, it's got these -- it looks like

a -- something on the windows, I think, where

it looks like a ship steering wheel or

something. Inside of it has got kind of heavy

tables and then there is a bar in there and --

I don't know. It's just another bar except

it's -- it's fixed up like it's a -- make a

seaman feel comfortable. I think it's pretty

close to the waterfront.

Q. Did they serve food?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1789

A. I don't have no recollection. If they

did, I didn't order anything.

Q. Did they have men or women waitresses

and waiters or both or do you remember?

A. No, I think they had men. I think the

men served, bartenders.

Q. Okay. The first time you were in

there, is that something you just ran up on or

did you intend to go there when you -- in other

words, were you intending to stop at this bar

or was it just something you saw on the way?

A. Well, some of these bars get -- see, my

intention was when I went down there I

started -- when I started frequenting these

places, initially I had contacted a travel

agency when I first got there, and I asked them

how, you know, the procedure was to get a

passport and get out of the country.

Q. Do you remember what travel agency that

was?

A. No, I just made a telephone call.

Q. You just picked it out of the

directory?

A. Yes. And they told me that -- I

explained -- I put down some story about

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1790

identification or something. I was from a

different city in Montreal, and they told me

that if I didn't have sufficient -- something

about identification, that I would have to get

what you call a guarantor, someone I knew two

years, and they would vouch for me and swear

that I was who I said I was. So I didn't want

to wait around two years.

Q. What ID did you have on you then at

that point?

A. In the -- well, at that point I had --

I had the Rayns. I had rented the room under

the Rayns name, the apartment. The only thing

I had identification was the Rayns but not -- I

said I rented a room and now I may have rented

a room under the Galt name because I changed

sometime. As soon as I got there, I changed

from Rayns to Galt, so I'm not one hundred

percent certain.

Q. What ID did you have on you, driver's

license, Social Security card, anything?

A. I had a driver's license and a title.

Q. Where did you get the driver's license

from?

A. I got them -- I had got them in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1791

Chicago, Illinois.

Q. Under the name of Rayns?

A. Rayns, yes.

Q. And you had a title to the car?

A. Yes.

Q. Was that an Illinois title that you had

on the car?

A. Yes, East St. Louis, yes.

Q. When you got the driver's license in

Illinois, did you not have to show a birth

certificate or anything at that time to get the

driver's license?

A. No, they didn't ask for anything at

that time.

Q. Did you have to take a test to get --

some kind of examination to get --

A. Yes. Well, you can get a book and read

up on it, and then when you take the test, it

makes it a little easier.

Q. I mean, that's what you did?

A. Yes.

Q. Where -- and this is in Chicago where

you got the license?

A. Yes.

Q. And it was under the name of Raynes, R

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1792

A Y N E S?

A. R A Y N S, yes.

Q. Now, Mr. Ray, you went to the Neptune

Bar, and did you meet Raul the first time you

were there or was it later that you met him?

A. I don't believe it was the first time I

was there. It probably would have been the

second time I was there. It could have been

the first. But what I was -- I was going to

these bars and I was making certain inquiries,

nothing to get me in jail, but, you know, I was

thinking about the possibility of I could

either catch a merchant seaman drunk and, you

know, more or less roll him. Or I could -- of

course, a merchant seaman's papers is traveling

just like a passport or I could possibly buy

one. So someone possibly could have mentioned

my name to him so -- but it was earlier there.

It could have been the first time or it could

have been the second, but it was one -- it was

one of the first times I went in there.

Q. Okay. Were you at a table or sitting

at the counter or on a bar stool?

A. No, I was sitting at a table, yes.

Q. And were you there before he was or was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1793

he there before you were?

A. No, I was there before he was.

Q. Were you sitting with anyone?

A. No.

Q. And he came in. How long had you been

there when he came in?

A. I can't recall. It probably wasn't --

it wasn't very long I don't think. Because I

never did stay around bars too long.

Q. Okay. Were there many people in the

bar at that time?

A. I don't believe there was, no.

Q. And when he came in, what attracted you

to him or how did you get the conversation

started with him?

A. I didn't start the conversation with

him. He sat down and started the conversation

with me, and we were just talking about general

things and I told him --

Q. Like what general things, the weather?

A. Yes. Where we was from and things of

that. Generally what we were doing. I think

he mentioned something about he might have -- I

can't recall everything he said. He might -- I

kind of got the impression he was in the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1794

Merchant Marines, and I told him I was in the

United States and I was interested in -- I was

interested in, you know, being on a ship and

things like that.

Q. When you were in this Neptune Bar, did

you have the gun with you?

A. No. I never carried the gun with me.

I still had the gun, but I wasn't -- I didn't

carry it around with me.

Q. Okay. Can you tell us this about

Raul, about what size person was he, was he

five foot ten, five foot eleven, five foot five

or was he taller than you or shorter than you?

A. Well, I'm five foot ten. I just

assumed he was around five foot eight or nine

or maybe a little -- somewhere in that general

area. It's hard to estimate people's weight,

but I didn't think he, you know, weighed a

whole lot.

Q. When he came in, what were you

drinking?

A. I was probably drinking a beer or

something like that.

Q. And when he came in, did he just come

straight to your table?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1795

A. Well, I really didn't know. I know he

showed up at the table. I usually don't pay

too much attention to people when I got in a

bar, and I usually don't stay in there too

long. Of course, I don't drink beer. I might

sit there, and, of course, as I mentioned

earlier, you have to buy something. I was just

more or less sitting there resting or thinking

what I was going to do next. I assume that is

what I was thinking about.

Q. So you were at the table by yourself?

A. Yes.

Q. When he came in, did he get anything to

drink, any beer or whiskey or anything that you

can recall first?

A. Yes, he probably got a beer. Yes, I'm

fairly certain of that because usually that's

the general practice.

Q. Okay. What was he dressed in? Was he

all dressed up or did he have on anything that

you can remember at this moment? Did he have

on a coat, shirt, what?

A. He just had a -- he just had a suit on

and a shirt.

Q. With a tie?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1796

A. No, he didn't have no tie on.

Q. A dress suit?

A. Yes. It was dark, a dark dress suit.

Q. Did he wear glasses?

A. No, he didn't.

Q. So he came over to your table, and you

were there by yourself and did he have

something in his hand to drink or did he order

something after he sat down there with you?

A. I really don't remember the small

details, but I'm certain he had something,

ordered something to drink.

Q. And you and this gentleman struck up a

conversation, just general things such as the

weather or something like that and how long did

you sit there with him?

A. Well, I don't know. It wasn't too

long. I mean, I have had -- I have had

hundreds of conversations in bars with people.

That's what usually gets me in the

penitentiary, but I was -- we didn't sit there

too long I don't think. We just started

talking and I was showing an interest in, you

know, travel documents or getting in the

Merchant Marine or something I think.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1797

Q. You told him then that you were the

first -- that you were -- the first time that

you were interested in some travel documents?

A. No, I don't think I mentioned it that

time. No, I just told him -- I told him I

liked to travel and, you know, Merchant Marine

or something like that.

Q. Okay. How long did the two of you talk

would you say that first night? I mean, are we

talking about a night or in the daytime?

A. No, this was in the daytime.

Q. Okay. Two o'clock in the afternoon,

five o'clock, what?

A. It was in the afternoon, but I couldn't

give you --

Q. Still daylight?

A. Yes. But it wasn't -- I know it wasn't

nighttime.

Q. I may have asked you earlier but how

long had you been in when he came in, just five

minutes, ten minutes, an hour or what?

A. I don't think I had been in there too

long because I --

Q. Less than hour?

A. The reason -- yes, the reason I say

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1798

that is because I don't stay in them places too

long.

Q. Okay. And you and Raul talked 30

minutes, an hour, what?

A. Yes. Maybe 15 or 20 minutes,

something, just talking.

Q. Who decided to leave first? Did you

say you had to go or he said he had to go or

what happened that you broke up?

A. Well, I think either me or him -- it

was probably him. He probably mentioned he had

to go somewhere or something. But we agreed to

meet again and just talk about things.

Q. What was the reason you agreed to meet

again when you met a man you had never seen for

15 minutes? What was the reason you agreed to

meet him again?

A. Well, he seemed -- I mean, I got the

impression from talking to him -- I have talked

to these people as I mentioned, you know,

several times in bars and things, and I just

got the impression from the way he acted and

the way he looked and the way he talked that I

might be able to make a deal with him. So I

didn't have anything else to do so I just --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1799

Q. Now what led you to that? What did you

see about him that led you to that? I mean,

did he say something or are you just assuming

that from looking at him or what?

A. Well, the way he talked and he seemed

like -- he seemed to be -- he gave me the

impression he might help me or something like

that.

Q. But what did he say specifically that

made you think that?

A. Well, just the way he talked about

the -- you know, getting in the Navy and

things, getting in the Merchant Marines and

travel documents and I just -- I really didn't

have anything to lose so we discussed things,

and he said, you know, we will talk about it

some -- we will talk about it some other time.

And it didn't seem unusual to me at all.

Q. Did he tell you he had been in the

Merchant Marines?

A. I got the impression. He never did

tell me much of anything really, but I got the

impression from the conversation.

Q. All right. And you were there with him

15 minutes or so and you were just under the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1800

impression from the way he talked that he might

help you?

A. Yes, from what he said and things of

that nature.

Q. Did he ever say I know some way to help

you or I can get someone to help you or I

can -- anything that he could do for you that

you remember now?

A. He gave me that impression. I can't

remember all the details what he was saying,

the vibrations I was getting that he could do

it. He might be able to do it, and as I

mentioned, I just -- as I mentioned, I didn't

have anything else to do and I just agreed

to --

Q. Did you mention to him then you needed

a passport?

A. Not at the first meeting. We got

around to that later.

Q. Okay. When did you see him again?

A. Well, I think I seen -- I think I seen

him another time and --

Q. The next day, next week, next month?

A. Yes. I think it would be probably a

couple of days. I don't think it was the next

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1801

day.

Q. Was that an intentional meeting, you

intended to meet him or was that just a

by-chance meeting again?

A. No, we said we would meet somewhere.

Q. And where did you meet?

A. Well, we met at the same place there.

Q. Okay. Were you there first or was he

there first?

A. I was there first.

Q. All right. And when he came in, was he

dressed about the same as he was before or was

he dressed differently this time?

A. I don't know if he had the same -- he

was dressed about the same. I don't know if he

had the same suit -- same color suit on, but he

didn't have no tie on and he had his shirt

buttoned and collar, but that's the only thing

I noticed about him.

Q. Can you tell us something about -- what

would have been his weight roughly, what would

you just guess his weight to be?

A. Well, I thought he weighed about one

forty or forty-five pounds, but I just can't be

certain on someone's weight like that.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1802

Q. What color hair did he have?

A. He had a kind of a -- it was a dark

hair. It's not auburn, but it's real dark with

what I would call a slight red tint in it.

Some -- maybe dyed his hair or something.

Q. Did he have a part in his hair?

A. No. It was just kind of wavy and

combed back.

Q. Maybe I asked you earlier, was he

wearing glasses?

A. No.

Q. He was not wearing glasses. All right.

Anything else you observed about him, Mr. Ray,

such as was he right handed or left handed?

When he drank, would he use right hand or left

hand or did you observe him that closely?

A. No, I didn't observe him that -- no.

Q. Did he talk like he had been someone

that had been grew up in Canada or in Detroit

or someone in Tupelo, Mississippi, or where?

What was your impression of him?

A. Well, he had a somewhat Spanish accent

and I had had a lot of association with

Mexicans. I have been to Mexico before and in

Leavenworth I knew a lot of Mexicans. The fact

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1803

is I tried to learn to speak Spanish at one

time so I was certain that he was -- well, he

could have been something other than Spanish.

There is other people, you know, that speaks

the Latin language besides Spanish. But I just

assumed he was -- came from a Spanish speaking

country.

Q. Did you presume that from the way he

looked or the way he talked or both or what?

A. Well, the way he talked and the way he

looked, both.

Q. Was he light skinned, dark skinned,

medium, what, how would you --

A. No, he was sort of -- he was more dark

than the average Anglo-Saxon.

Q. The first time that you saw him did he

tell you his name?

A. Yes, he said it was just Raul.

Q. Did he pronounce it that way or was

it -- is that the way he pronounced Raul or

was it just Raul or do you believe --

A. I believe he kept pronouncing it Raul.

I don't think he -- he didn't just say Raul.

I think --

Q. What name did you give him as being

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1804

your name?

A. Well, at that time I gave him my name

as being Eric Galt.

Q. So that's what he knew you as then?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. Did you tell him your full

name or just your first name the first time you

saw him?

A. I think I just told him -- probably

just told him Eric.

Q. Okay. And he told you his name was

Raul?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. The next time that you met

him you were there first and did he come in and

sit down at the table with you, same table or

close by the same area that you were?

A. Yes. It was the same general -- you're

talking about the second meeting?

Q. The second meeting, right.

A. Yes.

Q. All right. And did you begin having a

conversation with him then?

A. Yes. He got more deeply in the -- you

know, the -- you know, what we was talking

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1805

about.

Q. Okay. What did you tell him you wanted

out of him?

A. Well, I just told him I was interested

in, you know, travel documents and things of

that nature and --

Q. Okay. When you mentioned travel

documents, what do you mean specifically, visa,

passport or what, or both?

A. I don't really -- travel documents is

what -- he referred to that name. I

subsequently learned travel documents is --

what is it? It's a one-way ticket to a place

where there is no return. There is no return.

It's just that one way.

Q. Up to that point, Mr. Ray, had you ever

had a passport?

A. No, I hadn't.

Q. Ever had a visa or any reason to apply

for either one of those?

A. Well, I had one in Mexico, but you get

a visa going down there, but other than that I

never had one.

Q. You were in Mexico I believe you said

in 1959?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1806

A. Yes.

Q. And when you entered that country, what

name were you using?

A. I believe that's when I was using the

O'Connor name.

Q. The one you had mentioned earlier?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. How long did you and Raul

stay together this time, the second visit,

would you say?

A. I would say we stayed together a little

longer.

Q. Fifteen minutes, thirty, an hour?

A. Yes. We probably -- thirty minutes or

so. I don't -- I think we had a little

conversation after we left there, too.

Q. All right. Who left first, you or this

Raul?

A. Yes, I believe at that time we left at

the same time. We discussed some things, you

know, walking down the street.

Q. Okay. When you were in the Neptune,

what did you talk to him about the second visit

specifically?

A. That was about -- we got more specific

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1807

and I was talking about, you know, foreign

countries, going to foreign countries and

things like that. And he indicated he could

help me do --

Q. Did he tell you you would have to have

some money?

A. That I would have to have some money?

Q. For him to get this -- to help you.

You said he said he thought he could help. Did

he say you could have -- did he say you would

have to have some money?

A. I can't quite understand. Did he

want --

Q. Well, or --

A. Did he want me to pay him?

Q. That's right. Yes.

A. No. There was no -- never any question

about me giving him money, no. But --

Q. Did you tell him where you wanted to

go?

A. No, I didn't tell him where I wanted to

go, no.

Q. Okay. Now, you said you left with him

and you walked outside. And what did you talk

about when you walked outside?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1808

A. We made -- I had mentioned in the -- I

had mentioned in the bar and I probably

mentioned on the outside, too, that well -- I

wouldn't have mentioned it twice. I probably

went over the details when I went outside. At

that time I decided to try to possibly get one

from someone being my -- being a guarantor

because I was kind of concerned about getting

involved.

Q. You're talking about someone giving an

affidavit saying they knew you and could vouch

for you, that you were a citizen of Canada and

those type things; is that right?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. How were you going to do

that?

A. Well, I was thinking about trying to

meet a female and see if she could possibly

help me do it. So before -- I think before I

seen Raul the second time, I went to a travel

agency and asked him, you know, if there was

any resorts close by that I could go, you know,

for six days, six or seven days. And they gave

me one called the Gray Rocks and it's right

outside of Montreal.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1809

So anyway I met -- when I seen Raul,

I didn't tell him I was going to try to meet

someone and get me a guarantor. But I told him

I would be gone for a week and I had some

business to take care of. And he said, okay.

And so I did go to Gray Rocks and I did meet a

woman after I was up there about five or six --

five or six days I guess.

Q. Let me back up, Mr. Ray, a moment.

A. Yeah.

Q. When you went outside and you talked to

Raul --

A. Yes.

Q. -- how long did you stay out there with

him?

A. Oh, we was just walking down the

street. It wasn't very long.

Q. And he was driving a car?

A. If he was --

Q. Okay. You don't know how he left the

area?

A. No, I have no idea.

Q. And you left in your Plymouth?

A. No, I walked down there.

Q. Well, did you have a room at a hotel or

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1810

a rooming hall or something at that point?

A. Yes. I was living in south Montreal,

in the Ajax Apartments. I think it was about

4800 South Notre Dame Street was the name of

the street.

Q. Did you -- how were you financing this?

Where were you getting your money from then?

A. Well, I had two hundred fifty dollars

when I escaped from prison. I worked in the

restaurant a while and I had held up a brothel

for sixteen or seventeen hundred dollars. So I

don't know just exactly how much money I had,

but I had -- I wasn't really uptight for money.

Q. This brothel, was that before you met

Raul that you held it up?

A. Yes. That's the -- well, I had set it

up when I was in Dorion, the day before I went

to Montreal. I went up there that night, and I

met some woman at a bar and I went home with

her and I went to her apartment. And, you

know, I found out her address and the next day

I met her again.

Q. Okay. And you had gone to some man

that was sending business to her or her pimp I

guess, is that what he was?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1811

A. He was in the building, yes.

Q. Okay. And you had robbed him of how

much, sixteen or seventeen hundred dollars?

A. It was mixed bills, sixteen or

seventeen hundred dollars in United States and

Canadian currency.

Q. That was in Dorion?

A. No, that was in Montreal.

Q. It was in --

A. Dorion. I drove into Dorion and set it

up, the robbery, and then the next day I moved

into Montreal and rented the apartment. The

Harkay I think is the apartment on Notre Dame

Street. H A R.

MR. BLEDSOE: And then Mr. Pepper

interjects K A Y.

A. K A Y. And then I went ahead and

robbed the place.

Q. Well, you didn't know in advance before

you had gotten to Montreal whether you just --

you were going to do but you didn't know what

place or anything, am I correct?

A. Yes. I was fairly certain I was going

to do it because I was getting very short on

money and usually those places don't -- they

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1812

don't call the police on you anyway.

Q. That's what I'm saying. You were going

to do it but you didn't know what place then

until you got into Montreal?

A. No, I had no idea what place.

Q. Okay. When you had gone to Gray Rocks

and what -- then you had gone to Gray Rocks and

what happened there?

A. Well, as I mentioned, I did meet

some -- a lady up there after I was up there

about five or six days and I -- but I didn't

think that was, you know -- I didn't want to

approach her about something that was illegal

in just that short of time. You know, I

didn't, you know, know her long. So I never

did get into it.

Q. Okay. How long did you stay in Gray

Rocks?

A. Six or seven days.

Q. Okay. And then you returned to

Montreal?

A. Yes.

Q. And had you set up an appointment with

Raul at that time to meet him?

A. Yes. I told him I was -- you know, I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1813

would be back there.

Q. Did he give you a -- any telephone

number to contact him?

A. No. I never had any contact.

Q. How were you going, in other words,

were you going to set up a certain date to meet

him back at the Neptune; is that correct?

A. Yes. I remember one time we met in the

Neptune and then we went on somewhere else. I

think we went to a restaurant but it was not --

Q. Okay. Now, when you met Raul the

third time, he knew then that you were looking

for some -- your term travel papers, am I

correct, sir?

A. Yes. That's correct.

Q. And he never did tell you you would

have to pay him anything to get the travel

papers?

A. No. It was kind of quid pro quo. He

was going to -- sometime during the

conversation he was going to furnish me with

the -- what he called the travel documents and

a certain amount of money and he didn't --

Q. What was he going -- what was he going

to get out of it for doing this?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1814

A. Well, I was going to take some things

across the border for him in the back seat of

the Plymouth.

Q. He had already asked you that if you

would take -- if you would take some things

across the border, he would help you get in

your term travel papers, right?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. And you agreed to do that?

A. Yes. I was willing to do it, yes.

Q. When you say across the border, where

across the border were you going to take them?

A. Windsor, Canada, that's right across

the river from Detroit.

Q. Okay. When you say some things, you're

talking about some drugs or guns or what?

A. Well, I assumed it was drugs.

Q. And he didn't tell you specifically

what it would be?

A. No, he didn't say.

Q. And you agreed to do that if he would

help you get what you called travel papers,

right?

A. Yes.

Q. And this was on the third visit with

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1815

him?

A. Well, somewhere along there. I can't

remember just what was said on each visit. I

would say we had maybe five visits altogether.

Q. Okay. And then you agreed to do this?

And let me ask you this: Whatever you were

going to take across, did you actually do that?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. Was it something in boxes, bags or

what?

A. Plastic bags.

Q. Okay. And could you tell what it was

or did you ask what it was or did he tell you

what it was?

A. Well, no, he had me meet him in Windsor

on a certain day. I think it was a train

station -- near the train station. And he came

up. He showed up in time. I was sitting in

the car and he showed up at the meeting and he

just got in the car and directed me to a

different area of Windsor and then he got in

the back of the car.

In the Plymouth you could raise the

back seat up, and it would come unhinged. And

behind the back seat there was a bunch of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1816

springs back there, and that's what he did. He

apparently was familiar with the inside of it

and he put some -- I think it was about three

packages. I didn't turn around to look at him,

but I did notice something out of the back, you

know, the rearview mirror.

Q. Okay. Well now, when you met, where

were you when he put this in the back of the

car?

A. I was sitting in the front seat.

Q. But where were you though? Were you in

Montreal or Windsor?

A. We was in Windsor, yes.

Q. All right. And you had had an

agreement to meet him at some place there?

A. Yes. Near -- I think it was near the

train station or bus station. I think it was a

train station.

Q. Okay. And what time of day were you

going to meet him there?

A. It was some time in the afternoon, but

I don't know just exactly what time.

Q. All you were going to do was just drive

it across the border?

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1817

Q. And into where?

A. Into Detroit.

Q. Okay. And what did you -- what did he

tell you after you drove it across the border

that he would do then?

A. Well, I would take the material across

and then once we got across the border, he

would give me a passport and some money and he

would go his way and I would go my way.

Q. When you met him there, Mr. Ray, was he

driving something or was he walking or just

standing there, was -- what was he in? How did

he get there?

A. I was just sitting in the car and he

walked up and that was it.

Q. And he had something in his hands, some

bags or --

A. He had an attache case, that's all he

had that I saw.

Q. And he -- did he put the case behind

your seat or just open the case up and put

something behind the seat, which was it?

A. No, first he directed me to another

street where he -- and he got in the back of

the car and took the stuff out of the attache

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1818

case and got the seat up. I'm not talking

about the seat you sit on, I'm talking about

the back rest. And he put it in there and then

we left.

Q. Okay. Had you ever been to Windsor

before?

A. I think I went through there when I

went to Montreal earlier in 1960, 1959 or

whatever.

Q. And then did he get in the car and you

go across the border with him in the car and

with the substance in the back?

A. No. He got in the car and he told me

to let him off before we got to the -- we went

through the tunnel. There is two ways you can

get from Windsor to Detroit. One is the tunnel

and one is the bridge, and he had me let him

off. He asked me to meet him on the other

side. So I let him off and he said give him a

while. I think he got a cab and I assume he

got a cab or somebody hauled him across, and

then I went through the customs and I picked

him up on the other side. And then when I

picked him up, he directed me to a place, some

side street.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1819

Q. In Detroit?

A. Yes. And then he -- he took this

material out of the back seat and he told me

to -- you know, we was going to do the same

thing again.

Q. Did he tell you when?

A. Pardon?

Q. Did he tell you when?

A. Yes, right then.

Q. Oh, okay. The same day?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you do that?

A. Yes, we did.

Q. Okay. Well now, did he go back to the

same place where you were originally when he

came up with the attache and put it in the car

and meet him there again at the same place?

A. Did he go back to the same -- you're

talking about --

Q. Let me back up. Okay. You drove the

car alone across the border from Windsor to

Detroit, right?

A. Yes.

Q. And he met you over there?

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1820

Q. And you said he -- and you said he said

we are going to do the same thing again.

A. Yes.

Q. And did that mean go back to Windsor

and come back across again?

A. Yes.

Q. And my question is, did you go back to

Windsor and meet him again at the same place

that you had met him earlier?

A. No, I don't think -- he would meet me

on the -- he would get a cab or something and

meet me over there.

Q. Well, I'm what saying is, did you go

back to the same place to meet him back in

Windsor to get another --

A. Yes. We went to the same street.

Q. Where you met him earlier?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. And then again you went across

the border again and the same thing in the same

manner that you did earlier, right?

A. Yes, I assume the first time was a dry

run so we did the same thing but I -- it was

other problems on the second trip.

Q. What problems did you have?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1821

A. Well, on this -- on the second time we

went across the bridge instead of the tunnel.

Q. Did he go with you this time?

A. No, he didn't go with me.

Q. Still didn't go with you?

A. No. So -- well, anyway, when I got to

the customs house, I had purchased a TV, a

small TV when I was in Montreal to watch. I

thought I might be up there for a while. But

anyway when I got to the customs house, I

started thinking about the TV and I thought I

better declare it because it's -- I think

there's a tax on it and you have to declare

everything. I think there is a sign up there

that says it.

So anyway I pulled into the customs

house and told them I had a television set I

had purchased in Montreal. They asked me if I

had purchased anything, and so they had me pull

over in a -- they had a place where you can

park there.

Q. Okay. You had Illinois plates on your

car?

A. Yes.

Q. And an Illinois driver's license?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1822

A. Yes.

Q. Go ahead.

A. Well, anyway I parked there and the

customs agent he started going through the car

and this stuff was in the back, this material

was in the back seat as I mentioned, and he

started going through everything in detail. He

started under the hood and he was all over the

car. When he got back to the back, he started

searching the back and another customs agent

come out and told this first customs agent he

said, I will take over and told him to do

something else.

So when he took over, he terminated

the search and he took me in the office. And I

give him a -- I think it was three or four

dollars as some type of tax for carrying some

things across the border, export tax I guess

you could call it -- I guess you call it. So

then after I left there, then I met Raul on

the other side.

Q. The same place you did before?

A. No, this was on the bridge. The first

time was the tunnel. I met him there and then

he seemed kind of concerned and he --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1823

Q. What made you think that, that he was

concerned?

A. Well, I had got held up for a while.

Q. I see. The time element?

A. Yes. So he asked me what the hold up

was. I told him I had to pay a tax, and so I

gave him the -- I showed him the receipt and it

was the Rayns name on it. And, of course, I

gave him the Galt name when I first met him,

but he didn't say anything about it. He didn't

seem to -- anyway we drove back on into

Detroit.

Q. He rode with you?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Mr. Ray, at that point had Raul

ever given you any information about where he

was from or his last name or anything at all

about his background?

A. No. He was paying the bills so I never

did make any inquiries about, you know, his

last name or anything.

Q. Now when you say, "paying the bills,"

what bills was he paying?

A. Well, he was paying -- I was an

employee I guess you could call it.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1824

Q. He had given you some money at that

point?

A. Yes.

Q. How much money had he given you?

A. About sixteen or seventeen hundred

dollars maybe.

Q. And that was for taking this across the

border?

A. Yes.

Q. Is that what it was for?

A. Yes.

Q. Now, was that -- had he given you that

before you started across the first time or was

that after?

A. No, that was the second time. He

didn't give me nothing the first time.

Q. Okay. All right. And where did you

and Raul go in Detroit? How long did you stay

there?

A. We didn't stay there very long at all.

He -- after he got the material out, he told

me -- he said had had some problems getting the

passport and he said that, you know, he would

get them later. So he just asked me to, you

know -- we -- see, there was a lot of deception

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1825

going on here. I didn't intend -- if I had got

the passport and the money, I didn't intend to

go to Birmingham or anywhere else. I intended

to go back across, you know, back to Canada.

So anyway when he -- he said he had some

problem getting the passport and he said he

would get it the next time. So I went ahead

and agreed to go to Birmingham. And he

mentioned that I should check -- when I got

there, check the general delivery at the post

office under the name of Eric S. Galt.

Q. Was he going to get you a passport in

Canada or an American passport or did he say?

A. He didn't say. The only thing he ever

mentioned were travel documents, and I didn't

know what they were. As I mentioned,

subsequently I learned they were, you know,

one-way tickets to somewhere.

Q. Okay. When you and Mr. -- when you and

Raul got into Detroit, when was the next time

you saw him after that?

A. The next time I saw him would have been

in Birmingham.

Q. All right. Now at that time, when you

were taking these -- you made the two trips

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1826

across there, is that when he told you he

wanted you go to Birmingham or had he mentioned

that to you earlier?

A. No, we went through all that in the --

Q. Montreal?

A. Montreal. Yes.

Q. Okay. And what did he tell you he

wanted you to go to Birmingham for?

A. Well, he just said, you know, we can

make some more money and I could get another --

he promised me for certain I would get a

passport if I helped him again, and I don't

know what all the details he gave me. He told

me some things in Birmingham and some things in

Detroit, but I can't differentiate everything

he told me. I know it was just -- he asked me

to come down there and --

Q. He never told you why he wanted you to

go to Birmingham?

A. No. I don't believe he mentioned it.

I assume he mentioned -- I think he mentioned

something about Mexico. I'm not one hundred

percent certain, but I think he mentioned

something about Mexico, and, you know, money,

passports, things of that nature.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1827

Q. All right. Now, after you were in

Detroit with him, did you go back to Montreal?

A. Did I? No, I went to -- I went to

Chicago and then went from there to Birmingham.

Q. Okay.

A. See I went to Chicago. And he

mentioned, you know, before we went to

Birmingham he was going to get a different car

and things of that nature because the car I

had was a -- it run all right but it was

getting kind of old. So I decided to get rid

of the Plymouth. I gave it to my brother and

then I went on to Birmingham.

Q. Okay. When you were in Gray Rocks, did

you drive this Plymouth to Gray Rocks?

A. Yes, I did. I drove it to Gray Rocks.

Q. Did you actually meet some female

there?

A. Yes.

Q. And did you spend any time with her?

A. Well, I met her there. It was the

last -- probably about five days after I was

there I guess, I saw her -- subsequently I did

see her in -- she came to Montreal on vacation

and I saw her up there sometime in July. Then

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1828

I saw her again before I met Raul. I

stopped -- I was going to -- about the

passport, you know, I was thinking -- I had

mentioned about -- I was thinking about asking

her again before I met Raul in Windsor, but

she worked for a government agency so I thought

I --

Q. In Montreal?

A. Yes, she worked for -- no, Ottawa. I

met her in Ottawa. She worked for the Canadian

government.

Q. You said you saw her in Montreal.

A. Yes, I saw her three times. Once in

Gray Rocks and then I gave her my address in

Montreal and she just happened to come over

there on some type of vacation. She was up for

a couple of days and the third time I met her

was in Ottawa. Yes, it was either Ottawa or

Toronto.

Q. Did you ever --

A. It must have been Ottawa.

Q. Did you ever go to her home at any

time?

A. No, I never went to her home. No, I

think she was married and divorced and had

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1829

children.

Q. Okay. When Raul wanted you to go to

Birmingham, did you tell him that you had never

been to Birmingham?

A. When he first approached the subject in

Montreal, I knew Birmingham was bigger than

Mobile, which he wanted me to go to, but I

never did. Did he tell me -- did he ask me if

I had ever been in Birmingham before?

Q. No, sir. You said he mentioned that he

wanted you to go to Birmingham. I am just --

was wondering did you tell him that you had

never been to Birmingham?

A. I don't believe I told him that, no.

It wouldn't have been no reason. I was just

going to check the post office.

Q. Okay. He had given you sixteen or

seventeen hundred dollars?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. And you had gone to

Chicago. How long did you stay in Chicago?

A. Just about one or -- well, I stayed --

when I left Detroit, I think I stayed in a

motel.

Q. Okay.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1830

A. Right outside there. I think I stayed

in one motel for -- right outside Alton for a

day. And then I saw my brother, and I think I

stayed there maybe one or two days. I'm not

certain about these things.

Q. Did you drive the Plymouth to

Birmingham?

A. No, I gave that to my brother.

Q. Okay. How did you get to Birmingham?

A. I rode a train.

Q. From Chicago?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Well, when you left Chicago to

go to Birmingham, Mr. Ray, did you have any

idea how long you were going to be there in

Birmingham?

A. Not -- well, not when I went there.

No, I didn't have no -- I assumed it wouldn't

be very long since we was going to make some

type of, you know, run somewhere.

Q. Okay. What about -- excuse me, okay.

About when did you arrive in Birmingham

roughly?

A. I arrived there sometime in --

Q. In 1967 or 1968?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1831

A. Yes, 1967. It must have been late

August, the 25th or 23rd or 27th.

Q. Now, let me ask you something. Had

Raul given you any telephone number to contact

him if you needed to?

A. Yes.

Q. And do you remember what city the

telephone number -- was it a Chicago number or

a Montreal number, what city was --

A. No, it was a New Orleans number, yes.

Q. Had you ever been to New Orleans at

that time?

A. Had I ever been to New Orleans?

Q. Right.

A. Yes. I was in -- I was in there one

time when I went to Mexico earlier in 1959.

Had stopped there for one day.

Q. Okay. When you reached Birmingham did

you try to call Raul with this telephone

number he had given you?

A. No, I --

Q. You did not?

A. No.

Q. Okay. How long were you there before

you heard from him?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1832

A. It was a very short while because I

went to the -- I don't know just what day it

was. I know I went to the post office and it

was either a Sunday or a Monday and there was

some kind of letter from him. It was -- it was

addressed to Eric S. Galt, general delivery.

Q. Okay. What did the letter say?

A. Well, it just said met him at a bar

called the -- I can't recall the bar right now

but it's right across the street from the post

office.

Q. Okay. Now, when you went to

Birmingham, he didn't tell you why he wanted

you to go there at all?

A. Well, it had something to do with

illegal activities, yes.

Q. Okay.

A. The bar's name was the Spotlight Bar.

MR. BLEDSOE: At which point

Mr. Pepper states Starlight.

A. Starlight Bar, yes.

Q. Okay. You received the letter from him

and he told you to meet him. And how long did

you meet him after you got the letter, how long

was it before you met him?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1833

A. Well, I'm not certain about that. It

was real close there. It might have been --

see, that place is closed on Sunday I believe.

It was probably a Saturday or a Monday, but it

could have been a Saturday but it wasn't too

long after I got the communication. It wasn't

over a day or two.

THE COURT: Let's stop there. How

much more do you have?

MR. BLEDSOE: I'm on page 95. I

don't know how long the entire deposition is.

THE COURT: You're going to read

the whole thing?

MR. BLEDSOE: I believe so.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, it's

most of it. It's in sequence so we are going

to have to read most of it.

THE COURT: All right. Well,

let's -- we'll stop and resume at 2:15.

(Lunch recess.)

(Jury out.)

THE COURT: Are we ready to

proceed?

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, before

we start I would like to enter a motion on

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1834

behalf of Mr. Jowers and at this time, if Your

Honor please, the defendant Mr. Jowers would

move for a mistrial on the grounds that he is

under the care of a physician and disabled and

unable to be here. He's on medication where

he's moderately coherent, and he can't be here

to defend himself. He can't be here to offer

testimony in open court.

He was here the first several days.

He became ill during the trial, and on behalf

of Mr. Jowers, based on the statement of the

physician that's been treating him, ask Your

Honor to declare a mistrial.

Your Honor, I might add this is at the

request of the defendant and his family and

another attorney.

THE COURT: Do you have anything

in support of Mr. Jowers' physical condition?

MR. GARRISON: I have the exhibit

we presented this morning.

THE COURT: Let me see that again.

MR. GARRISON: In the statement

the physician says that he's not able to attend

court.

Your Honor, I might add that is the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1835

second physician that has stated he is unable

to attend court. I have the other report, I

don't know if I can find it now, but I have

another physician who will also say the same

thing that's here in Memphis.

THE COURT: I'm not -- let me see,

it says: Judge, Circuit Court, Memphis,

Tennessee. It's dated December 3rd, 1999.

Ross DeBoole, M.D., Reelfoot Medical --

Reelfoot Family Medical Center, 229 South Court

Street, Tiptonville, Tennessee. "Your Honor, I

have examined Mr. Loyd Jowers on December 2nd

and 3rd, 1999, and performed laboratory tests

through Med Lab. Mr. Jowers suffers from

severe cerebral arteriosclerosis, clinically

significant malnutrition, ongoing urinary tract

infection and headache which are probably of

vascular origin for which he is receiving

treatment which will on December 9th, 1999. I

would appreciate your excusing him from

judicial proceedings during this time."

I'm not sure I understand what that

means "which will on December 9th." What does

that mean, Mr. Garrison?

MR. GARRISON: I think it's

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1836

continued through that date is what I

understand.

THE COURT: You mean his

treatment? It says: "I would appreciate your

excusing him from judicial proceedings during

this time." That's not the same thing as

saying that he is unable to attend and -- I

don't know. I have some question in my mind as

to whether or not the doctor was aware that

he's already involved in judicial proceedings,

that is, a trial. And I don't know whether

Mr. Jowers' condition is serious enough that it

would warrant the interruption of the trial.

He simply says: "I would appreciate your

excusing him from judicial proceedings during

this time."

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, would I

be able to ask the Court to recess long enough

for me to get a little further information from

the doctor so we could determine whether or not

he thinks he is completely disabled and unable

to attend because of the medication he's on

he's not fully aware of what is going on?

MR. PEPPER: May I be heard, Your

Honor?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1837

THE COURT: Mr. Pepper, yes.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor,

plaintiffs strongly oppose this motion.

Mr. Jowers was in the court early on in these

proceedings. Plaintiffs would have called him

then, did not do so. We are prepared to call

him at a later time when he was unavailable.

Plaintiffs were then prepared to travel to

Mr. Jowers' home and take his deposition at

this earlier time as well long before the 3rd

of December when he was examined by the

physician.

Plaintiffs received word from counsel,

Mr. Jowers, that if we did so, he would only

plead the Fifth Amendment to any critical

questions that would be asked and that would be

the extent of his defense. He would knowingly

plead the Fifth Amendment.

Plaintiffs at that time did not wish

to waste the Court's time and a day of these

proceedings by traveling up there and elected

not to go and not to depose Mr. Jowers.

Instead plaintiffs inserted into the record a

great deal of relevant information previously

given by Mr. Jowers under oath in a deposition

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1838

in a prior case, which although the cause of

action was different, dealt nevertheless with

the same facts in issue here.

Plaintiff notes also would ask the

Court -- respectfully ask the Court to consider

the fact that after Mr. Jowers absented himself

from court, he allowed counsel to continue.

And counsel continued with his defense up to

and through the point where plaintiffs have

closed their case.

Now, all of plaintiffs' submissions --

entry of submissions in this action have been

put before the Court and the jury and

plaintiffs' case has been closed. Counsel for

the plaintiffs believes that counsel for the

defense has probably been in touch with

Mr. Jowers on a regular basis reporting as to

what has happened in this courtroom thereby

giving him the opportunity to make any comments

or provide any instructions which he would --

he would want to do even though he has been

outside of the court.

For all of that -- those reasons, and

for the fact that we have come so far in these

proceedings and there is so much evidence here,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1839

Your Honor, we oppose this motion and

respectfully request that these proceedings be

allowed to carry forward to a conclusion. And

if the defendant is unhappy and dissatisfied

with the result, he does have the remedy of

appeal.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, I just

say this in response to that. He was seen by a

physician here in Memphis about the third or

fourth day of the trial, and it appeared at

that time, I have a report somewhere, but that

he probably would be able to return to court in

a day or two. That's the reason it was asked

of Your Honor the first day he was absent to

tell the jury.

His condition has gone steadily down

since then because he had every intention of

being here. He was here the first several

days. And certainly you don't know whether he

takes a pill or what have you, that's his

prerogative and his privilege and his right in

court. And he does have a right to be here.

And he's not here because he's unable to be

here, and I can obtain further medical proof

regarding that issue if the Court would permit

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1840

me to.

But I think certainly at this point

the Court would have to seriously consider the

motion because the defendant -- because if he

hadn't been here at all, it would be a

different thing. He was here the first few

days, and I think because of his condition that

he has -- was not here because he can't be

here. And I think he has a right to be here to

defend himself however he want to defends

himself. He doesn't have to take the stand at

all if he doesn't want to, but he does have a

right to be here and he's not here because it's

no fault of his.

I think under the circumstances, Your

Honor, the Court should seriously consider

declaring a mistrial of the case. If we need

to get his -- a recess, we can get his

deposition and what have you. I don't know how

long that will be but whatever it takes.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor, if this

were a defendant who were legitimately

interested in providing evidence under oath to

this Court, and as being denied the opportunity

to do so because of his condition of his

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1841

health, that would be one thing. But I

respectfully suggest to the Court that this

defendant if he were to take that stand this

afternoon or any other time would in fact

invoke the Fifth Amendment and would not

otherwise characterize his defense.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, if I

might just say this: He's been present every

time. We spent two days with Mr. Ray taking

his deposition, he was present there. He has

been present when Doctor Pepper took his

deposition. He's been present every proceeding

we've had. It's not that he doesn't have an

interest in defending himself. He has been

present every time. Of course, this is the

first time during the trial he has become ill

and can't be here. Certainly he had the right

to be here, and I -- I think under the rules,

if Your Honor please, as I understand them if

he's unable to be here, the Court would either

have to declare a mistrial or recess the Court

until we can get better information about it.

THE COURT: This morning before

the motion was made, you indicated that the

defendant's proof was complete except for the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1842

reading of Mr. Ray's deposition. Is there any

additional proof that you know of that would be

presented on behalf of the defendant?

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, at this

moment I have a subpoena out for another

witness. Whether or not the process server can

get the witness, I'm not sure. If he does,then

we would have another one. If not, well, that

would be -- in fact, Doctor Pepper gave me the

address of the witness this morning and we are

trying to get served. So far I'm not sure if

he's been served.

THE COURT: Well, it was suggested

to me that in spite of his condition and even

after this exhibit was made in the proof --

this exhibit was made a part of the record,

that the defendant was still prosecuting his

case and getting out subpoenas.

MR. GARRISON: That was before I

received this information from you that we

issued the subpoena.

THE COURT: It seems to me that

the suggestion of a mistrial comes a little

late after the plaintiff has continued in spite

of the knowledge that his illness and at the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1843

request and permission of the defendant the

trial has progressed. And at this point there

is nothing culpable to be presented by the

plaintiff because they have closed their proof,

and the onus is now on the defendant to come

forward, although he has no burden to begin

with. If there is proof to be presented in his

behalf, we have reached that point where he

should do so.

Now, the defendant has made prior

testimony -- statements in this case -- not in

this case but on the issues involved. And at

the time that the statements were made, he was

under oath and his testimony sworn to. So that

if he were to be presented now as a witness, he

could only reaffirm the testimony that he has

previously given. Or if he contradicted it, it

would only nullify his testimony having given

diametrically opposed statements would not

bolster his position here but would simply

nullify all of his testimony. So if there is

any proof from which the defendant can benefit,

it would not be coming from the defendant

himself at this point.

Also the letter that I have here it

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1844

does not unequivocally state that the defendant

is unable to attend but simply requests that he

be excused. For all of the reasons I have

stated, I'm going to deny the motion at this

time. We are going to proceed.

MR. PEPPER: All right.

THE COURT: Bring the jury out

please, sheriff.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: All right. Are we

ready to proceed?

MR. GARRISON: Yes, sir, we are

ready to resume with the reading of the

deposition of James Earl Ray.

THE COURT: All right, sir.

(Whereupon, the following is the

continuation of the reading of the deposition

transcript of James Earl Ray.)

Q. Okay. And when you met him at this

Starlight Bar, was he driving anything, was he

with anyone else or tell me about it?

A. No. As far as I know, he wasn't

driving anything. I just met him at the

Starlight and --

Q. Did you get there first or did he get

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1845

there first?

A. I got there first.

Q. All right. Now, when you saw him at

the Starlight Bar, what did he tell you then he

wanted you to do?

A. Well, he had quite a few things to do.

I'm not certain the sequence he wanted to do

it. He wanted to purchase a car and he also

wanted to buy some sophisticated photographic

equipment. And then I don't know just what

he -- what he -- all he went into that day and

what he went into the next day. But we just

had -- he just had -- generally that first

meeting I think was just to see if I was okay

and was ready to do what he wanted to do.

Q. At that point you still didn't know his

last name?

A. No, I didn't.

Q. And you didn't know where he was from

or anything about his background?

A. I didn't know anything, no.

Q. How long did you stay in the Starlight

Bar when you met him there?

A. The first time?

Q. Yes, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1846

A. It wasn't very --

Q. After you got the letter.

A. Yes. It wasn't very long because he

had me -- I think it was -- I believe it

was getting -- it was getting along close to

evening. It was a little later than we usually

met.

Q. Okay. Now he gave you some money then,

did he?

A. No, he didn't.

Q. He didn't? Okay. He wanted you to

purchase a car?

A. Yes.

Q. And some from photographing equipment?

A. Yes.

Q. And what did he tell you he wanted with

the photographing equipment?

A. Well, he didn't tell me. He just told

me what he wanted.

Q. What type of photographing equipment

did he want?

A. I don't know. It was just wrote down.

I didn't -- when I -- subsequently when I went

to buy it, I think I showed the clerk, you

know, what I wanted.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1847

Q. Okay. Did you go straight that day and

get it?

A. No, no. I didn't have the money at

that time.

Q. How long was it before you purchased

the photographic equipment?

A. Well, subsequently we had another

meeting and then he started to look for a car.

And he had to me look for a car and he stayed

around there somewhere. I don't know where he

stayed at. But anyway it took me two or three

days to locate a car.

Q. Where were you staying?

A. I was staying at 2800 -- 20 something

Highland Avenue in Birmingham.

Q. Is that a rooming house?

A. Yes.

Q. When did you meet him in Nashville, was

that the next day or the next two or three days

or --

A. After I got there?

Q. Yes, sir. After you met him the first

time at the Starlight.

A. I am not certain it was the next day.

Q. Okay. Did you met him in the Starlight

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1848

the next time again, the same place?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. And again, you don't know

how he got there, whether he walked up, drove

up or someone brought him to the Starlight?

A. No. I was usually -- I know whenever

he had a meet -- we had a meeting I was usually

always the first one there.

Q. Now he had given you a note to purchase

some photographing equipment and then the

second time you saw him did he give you some

money to purchase it with?

A. Well, I think the first time we

purchased the car when I found the Mustang and

I don't know if you want to go into all the

details how I found it, but anyway I got it.

He had agreed to -- I told him what kind it was

and everything. So he agreed to purchase it

and then he gave me the money to purchase it

with. And I went down and purchased the car.

And then after I got it, after I got the car, I

drove back to the Starlight, picked him up and

then we went to Highland Avenue and we parked

out there near the rooming house and that's

when he went into the photographing equipment

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1849

and what all he wanted me to do.

And I think he -- I can't recall just

how much money he gave me now to -- the Mustang

cost about nineteen hundred dollars. He paid

for that. Then he gave me some more money, and

I have got all this stuff wrote down somewhere.

I think it was -- I am not certain just how

much it was. I think the photographing

equipment come to about five hundred dollars

but he gave me some extra money anyway.

Q. When he gave you the sixteen or

seventeen hundred dollars in Montreal, was that

in large bills or small bills or what?

A. It was sort of small bills, twenty

dollar bills and it was mixed currency. It was

United States and --

Q. Now, Mr. Ray, when he gave you the

money to purchase the car and the photographing

equipment, was that large bills or small bills

or what?

A. I can't -- I think -- I think the

Mustang, I'm not certain. I think it must have

been some rather large bills because they would

have, you know, been kind of bulky. I can't

remember just what all the denominations was.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1850

Probably the person that I bought it from might

remember.

Q. At that point did he tell you what he

wanted you to do, why he wanted the

photographing equipment or any job he asked you

to do or any reason he wanted you to buy a car?

A. Well, yes. He went through that we was

going to Mexico and I was going to -- we was

going to make some type of --

Q. When were you going to Mexico?

A. Well, there was no specific date. It

was about -- I think it was about 30 days and I

think he subsequently -- the date was set up,

but it was about 30 days. I think it was

sometime -- I was supposed to meet him sometime

in early October and -- or let's see, yes,

early October and we went to Mexico.

Q. Did you still have your driver's

license at that point, the same driver's

license?

A. The Rayns?

Q. In Illinois.

A. No. While I was in Birmingham I -- the

landlord at the apartment I stayed in, a guy

named Peter Cherpes, C H E R P E S, he went

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1851

down to the state highway patrol and he drove

the car down. So they gave me a driver's test

and I got a driver's license.

Q. In Alabama?

A. In the Galt name, yes.

Q. Eric Galt?

A. Yes.

Q. You didn't have the Mustang at that

point though, did you, when you got your

driver's license?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. You had already purchased it?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. You purchased the Mustang

through an ad, is that the way you purchased

it? How did you find out about it?

A. I believe it was the want ad, yes.

Q. You called some man that had the

Mustang for sale and you asked him about it and

you went out to see it?

A. Yes. I went -- you have less problems,

you know, with police and things. Yes, I

got -- he told me where he was at.

Q. How did you get out to where he was?

A. Well, I probably took a taxi out there.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1852

Q. Okay. And that was at his home, the

person who you purchased the car from's home?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Did you -- when you arrived at

his home, did you drive the car, the Mustang?

A. No, I didn't drive the car. I told him

I didn't have no driver's license, and I think

his -- he drove me around in it and --

Q. What model Mustang was that?

A. I believe it was a 1966 or 1967.

Q. And what color was it?

A. It was sort of a whitish.

Q. Okay. Then did you decide then to buy

it?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Did he owe any money on the car?

A. No.

Q. And you paid him in cash; is that

correct?

A. Yes.

Q. And he gave you a receipt?

A. I believe he -- yes, I believe he did.

Yes.

Q. And then how did you leave?

A. I drove it.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1853

Q. Where did you drive it to?

A. Well, I went to -- I went to the

Starlight to pick up Raul and then from there

we went back to the Highland Avenue apartment.

Q. How did you know he was going to be at

the Starlight?

A. Well, he gave me the money there and he

told me to meet him there after I got the car.

Q. You told him you were going to go look

at the car?

A. Yes. I told him I was going to

purchase it, yes.

Q. Did you and Raul go for a ride in the

car?

A. No. I can't remember all the sequence,

how I bought the car, but he didn't go for no

ride with me. I think I told him I didn't have

a driver's license and I think that concerned

him. But we went up there and parked in the --

the Highland Avenue and so I think that was the

extent of our driving around.

Q. And then you had gotten your driver's

license pretty soon after that I gather?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. When did you see Raul

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1854

again after that, after this time where the two

of you rode in your car?

A. I saw him at a motel in Nuevo Laredo,

Mexico.

Q. Now, I gather you had planned that

night or the day you saw him with the Mustang

to go, is that correct, you had planned then to

go to Mexico?

A. After we purchased the Mustang?

Q. Right.

A. Yes. He explained everything to me

after we went back to the Highland Avenue

apartment.

Q. What did he explain to you?

A. He told me he wanted the camera

equipment. I think he gave me some money

there. I guess it was a thousand dollars I

would estimate, but I think the camera

equipment cost about five hundred dollars or

something. He may have given me more, but I

just can't recall just exactly.

Q. Where did you purchase the camera

equipment?

A. Well, I purchased some of it at the --

in downtown Birmingham. I just showed the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1855

lady, you know, what I wanted. Some of it they

didn't have on hand. I guess it was some

specialized equipment. They had to order it

from Chicago but --

Q. So you had to wait until they ordered

it and get another date?

A. Yes. I never did get it. I called up

Raul's contact. He had a contact in New

Orleans, and I called him up and told him that

I was having problems, you know, getting one of

the items he wanted. And the contact said,

well, just forget it and come down here for a

certain -- and come down here a certain date,

and so I never did get the -- I don't believe I

ever did get the camera.

Q. Okay. Mr. Ray, did you have more than

one number to contact Raul or did he only give

you one number to call him in New Orleans?

A. He gave me -- let's see, I had two

numbers altogether.

Q. All right.

A. In fact, I had three. I had one in

Baton Rouge. I got that later, but --

Q. Were these numbers written down on

something or did you just memorize them or how

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1856

did you know to call, what numbers? How did

you know to call these numbers?

A. I never wrote -- I usually write stuff

down backwards so if the police stops you or

something.

Q. How long did you keep those numbers?

A. Well, the first number he had me throw

it away when we was in Mexico. He said he had

a new number. That's when I took his -- this

material across the border in Mexico in October

of 1967. And then he gave me a -- then I

also -- yes. And then when we was in

Birmingham, I think I was still using the first

number, but he also gave me a backup number in

Baton Rouge.

Q. How long did you keep those numbers?

A. I don't think I kept them too long. I

kept the last one he gave me in Mexico. I

think I kept it until sometime in, you know,

1968.

Q. Did you -- do you still have the

number -- the number of when you were arrested

in London?

A. Do I still have the telephone numbers?

Q. Uh-huh.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1857

A. The --

Q. Any of these numbers.

A. Yes. I remember the last four digits

of the New Orleans telephone number.

Q. Okay. Did you ever furnish those to

any lawyer that represented you?

A. Yes, they're on file in court, yes.

Q. Okay. You met Raul then in Laredo

next?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. And what did you do there?

A. I met him in a motel. I was supposed

to be there, and I -- I was supposed to meet

him at a certain time there in a motel. I

can't think of the name of it. It's on a main

street. Going into Laredo it's on the

left-hand side of the street going south, and

the motel when you have to drive up, it's sort

of an incline for 40 or 50 feet and then you

turn left. And subsequently you can't see any

cars or anything from the street. So I

rented -- I checked in there under the name

Eric Galt. And after I was there about, I

don't know, thirty minutes or so, then Raul he

showed up and --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1858

Q. He told you where to check in or he

knew where you were going to be?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. And when he came that time, was

he riding in something or did someone bring him

or how did he get there?

A. Pardon?

Q. Was he riding in something, did someone

bring him, how did he get there?

A. He just showed up at the door and that

was it. I don't know how he got there. I got

the address in New Orleans. See, initially I

was supposed to meet him in New Orleans, but

when I got there, his contact said he was gone

and he gave me a place to meet in Nuevo Laredo.

I should have mentioned that earlier but all

these details.

But anyway, when he got there in the

motel in Nuevo Laredo we just had a sort of

brief conversation and he told me that he

wanted me to get a visa. See, when you come

into Mexico and go in border towns, you don't

need no visa. He wanted me to get a visa, and

he also wanted me to go across the border and

pick up some material.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1859

Q. And you had an Alabama driver's license

at that time?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Go ahead.

A. So anyway we left and we crossed then

back into Laredo which is right across the

bridge, and I think we went about maybe seven

or eight blocks north and then we turned right

and went west for a couple of miles. This is

my estimation, and he parked behind a car and

then there was some dude sitting in the car

and --

Q. Wait a minute. Now, what was he

driving?

A. He wasn't driving anything.

Q. You said he parked behind a car.

A. Well, we parked behind a car. I was

driving.

Q. I got you.

A. So he got out of the car and apparently

he had -- see, I gave him a set of keys to the

Mustang. The owner gave me two sets, and I

gave him one of them in Birmingham anyway.

Q. This was in Laredo we are talking

about?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1860

A. Yes. We are in Laredo now.

Q. Okay. Let me back up just a minute.

You had gone -- you had gone from Birmingham to

Laredo straight. In other words, you hadn't

gone any place, you hadn't veered off any other

place?

A. Yes, I veered off in -- I stopped -- I

stopped briefly. I didn't veer off. I stopped

briefly in the -- somewhere in northern

Louisiana I think it was or Mississippi.

Q. Okay.

A. I had purchased a .38 caliber revolver

and some shells.

Q. Okay. What had you done with your

other .38 caliber?

A. Yes, after I left the -- left Montreal

or Ottawa I was concerned about maybe, you

know, the police arresting with me a .38 and I

buried it by -- I went down the side street and

I buried it under a -- I think it was -- beside

a telephone pole.

Q. In Montreal?

A. No, no, on the highway.

Q. Okay. Somewhere between Montreal and

Birmingham?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1861

A. No, somewhere between Montreal and

Windsor, Canada.

Q. Okay.

A. Okay.

Q. Now, when he came to Laredo and met you

there, he just wanted to you go somewhere, you

didn't know why you were going or where you

were going, he just said, let's go somewhere?

A. He told me what we was going to do. We

was going to -- we was going across the border

and then we was going to put some stuff in the

tire and then I -- we exchanged tires.

Q. You're talking about drugs?

A. I don't know what they was.

Q. He didn't tell you what it was?

A. No. It was just in the tires is all I

know.

Q. You mean in the tires on the car or on

the spare or what?

A. The spare tire.

Q. And you said he stopped somewhere and

you pulled up behind some other people in

another car?

A. Yes. There was another car there.

Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1862

Q. Okay. And what happened then?

A. Well, he just got out and took the

spare tire out of the car in front of me and

then got the spare tire out of the back of my

car and we -- that was it. He just changed the

tires and then we went back across the border.

Q. And where did you go across the border?

A. Well, when we crossed the border and we

went to the customs house, he told me he wanted

me to get a visa. And he also told me when I

checked into the -- to get the visa to give

each one of the individuals that searched the

car a dollar. He said not to give them no

more.

So I went into the office and while I

was making out forms for the visa, I parked the

car in the back and when I came -- when I got

the visa form filled out, I went in the back

and there was three Mexican customs officials

in the back and I gave each one of them a

dollar and they didn't hardly shake the car

down. They took the chalk mark and marked

everything with an X and that was it.

Q. Okay. You pulled up behind a car. Did

it have some other individuals in it, the car

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1863

you pulled up behind?

A. Yes. It had one in the driver's seat,

yes.

Q. Was that a man or a woman?

A. It was a man.

Q. Did it appear to be someone Spanish or

could you tell?

A. I just seen the back of them. I just,

you know --

Q. What time of day are we looking at?

A. It was after dark.

Q. It was after dark?

A. Evening, yes.

Q. What kind of car did he have?

A. I really don't know. I had been in

jail. I didn't know one car from another

really.

Q. Mr. Ray, at that point had you ever

owned any type of rifle up until this point

when you got into Laredo?

A. Did I ever own a rifle?

Q. Right.

A. No. I never -- probably when I was ten

or twelve years old I used to, you know, hunt

with a rifle, a .22 rifle.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1864

Q. .22 single shot?

A. Yes.

Q. Is that the only rifle you had ever

owned?

A. Yes, that wasn't mine. That was my

father's.

Q. Okay. You purchased a rifle in

Birmingham, did you not?

A. Yes.

Q. And you took it back and exchanged it

for another rifle, right?

A. Yes.

Q. And then you left Birmingham heading

towards Memphis; is that correct?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. And did you have any

ammunition with the rifle?

A. Yes, I purchased some ammunition at

the -- at the --

Q. Store down in Birmingham?

A. Yes.

Q. Had you ever handled a rifle such as

this previously either in the military service

or any place? Had you ever had any rifle like

this in your hands previously?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1865

A. When I was in the infantry, you had to

qualify with what they call M-1 rifle.

Q. Did they -- did you have some training

to fire an M-1 rifle in the service?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. On the way from Birmingham

to Memphis did you stop and fire that rifle in

a rural area?

A. No, I didn't.

Q. You did not?

A. No.

Q. You never told anyone you did that?

A. Did I --

Q. Have you ever told anyone you stopped

and fired the rifle on the way from -- around

Florence, Alabama?

A. No, I never told anyone that.

Q. You have never written anyone and told

them that in writing?

A. No.

Q. You're sure now?

A. No, I never did fire it and I have

never told anyone that. I think William

Bradford Huie, he's a book writer, said I told

my lawyer that. He has written an article

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1866

saying that I fired the rifle, but the attorney

representing me at that time -- see, everything

I told Huie I wrote down on paper because I

never had no direct meeting with him. I think

he said Arthur Haynes said that I shot the

rifle somewhere along the road but Haynes has

denied it. So it's --

Q. So you did not fire the rifle?

A. No, I never did fire the rifle.

Q. Okay.

MR. BLEDSOE: And then Mr. Pepper

states Huie is H U I E.

Q. Now, we are in Laredo and you go across

the border again. Was this something -- was

this something in an attache case or something

like that and you did the same thing as you did

up in Windsor?

A. No. There was no attache case

involved. It was just the one tire.

Q. The spare?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. You don't know what it was, of

course, he didn't tell you?

A. No.

Q. Okay. You drove across and you stopped

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1867

to get a visa, did you have any problems with

that?

A. No. I didn't have no problems with

that.

Q. Where did you go in Mexico?

A. After I got the visa?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. Well, me and him went back to the motel

and we went kind of a circuitous route. He

directed me around, you know, the side streets.

We didn't go right straight down the Main

Street where the motel was.

Q. But you had gotten the visa and you

didn't go across the border then, you came back

to the motel?

A. Yes. I think we had picked up a tire

and we went back to the motel that I checked

into.

Q. You had gotten the visa and had it with

you?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. You went to the motel and then

where did you go from there?

A. Well, when I got to the motel, there

was an individual. We parked on the right-hand

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1868

side of the street and there was an individual

in the car parked on the other side of the

street kind of blocking off the tram way that

led up to the motel. And so we had a brief

conversation there at the time, me and Raul.

And he told me he wanted to -- he would be back

in the morning and to, you know -- he would

meet me there in the morning.

And then he got the -- he got the tire

out of the car and I think apparently put it in

the other car, and then I -- I left, you know.

I wanted to get out of there. I didn't want

to -- in other words, I wanted to leave. I

didn't want to watch them and things of that

nature.

Q. When you were in Birmingham the time --

A. Yes.

Q. You stayed, what would you do all day

long, how would you spend your time?

A. When I was in Birmingham, I wouldn't do

too much of anything. I would, you know, just

walk around or something like that or take care

of running errands or trying to get

photographing equipment, that's about it.

Q. Had you become acquainted with anyone

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1869

there, any females?

A. No. I didn't.

Q. All right. You're in Laredo and you

had gone back to the motel and what happened

next after that?

A. You're talking about Laredo? Now

after I --

Q. You had gone to get a visa and you and

Raul went back to the motel and you said you

had gone some place and someone exchanged

something and what after --

A. Now, after he changed -- he got the

tire apparently, the tire out of the back of my

car, he mentioned he wanted me to meet him

there at a certain time in the morning, at

eight or nine o'clock, I forgot which time it

was. So I drove on off and so I don't know

what happened to them. But this other guy was

sitting in the driver's seat. I don't know

whether he could drive or -- I just don't know

what happened after that.

Q. Okay. Well, where did you wind up next

after that?

A. Well, after -- I drove -- I guess I

drove about a mile and then I come back and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1870

they were going -- and I drove in the motel and

I just checked in and went to sleep and got up

the next morning and waited for them.

Q. Okay. How long did you stay in Laredo?

A. Well, just that over night there. That

was it.

Q. And where did you go -- where did you

go after that, after you left Laredo?

A. Well, the next morning he showed up and

he parked in there, I think he backed in.

Q. He was driving this time, you're

talking about Raul?

A. No, he wasn't driving, someone else was

driving the car.

Q. He was with somebody else?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. What kind of car was it, do you

have any idea?

A. I don't have no idea. It was a

Chevrolet or a dark car.

Q. Was the person with him a man or a

woman?

A. A man.

Q. Okay. Was it daylight or dark?

A. It was daylight, yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1871

Q. And this person that was with him, was

that someone that appeared to be Spanish, light

complected, could you tell anything?

A. He appeared to be Spanish, dark

complected. I didn't pay all that much

attention to him.

Q. Just the two of them in the car?

A. Yes.

Q. And Raul got out I guess and what

happened?

A. Well, he switched the tires back again.

He put the one that -- that he got in the

United States side, he put it back in the car

and got another one out and put it in his car.

Q. And then what happened?

A. Pardon?

Q. What happened after that?

A. Well, he just left. He told me that,

you know, he was going to -- going on the other

side of the customs. There was a customs house

about 50 kilometers inside of Mexico. And so

we just started, you know, driving towards the

customs house and --

Q. Did you cross the border?

A. No, we didn't go across the border. We

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1872

was going into the interior of Mexico at that

time.

Q. Okay. Well, did you go somewhere else

to another hotel or some place to stay a while

after you left?

A. No. We went straight -- this was about

nine o'clock in the evening. We went towards

the interior of Mexico.

Q. And did you go some place to Mexico?

Where did you stay after you left Laredo?

A. That morning at nine o'clock?

Q. Any time.

A. Well, we didn't stay anywhere. We

started driving into the interior of Mexico

after about 35 miles, 30 miles, we came to a

customs house and I pulled into the customs and

the customs officer came out there and he

looked at the front of my car and asked me if I

was a United States citizen, and I said, yes,

and he waved me on through. And while Raul he

was -- he was on the other side there,

apparently he got held up for some reason. I

don't know what the reason was and --

Q. He was not with you when you crossed;

he was not in your car?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1873

A. No, he wasn't.

Q. He was in this other person's car?

A. The other person's car.

Q. Okay. Where did you wind up then?

A. Well, anyway after he -- after he

apparently got held up, I pulled out and drove

sort of slow for about four or five miles

waiting until he could catch up with me, you

know, if he got out of there. So he caught up

with me after several miles and pulled over in

front of me and we stopped. And he got out of

his car and come back and got in my car and we

had a conversation.

Q. Okay. Mr. Ray, have you ever given a

deposition before this time?

A. About what, other matters?

Q. About any subject matter before?

A. Yeah, I have given depositions in

prison cases, and one of the libel depositions.

Yes, I have given several depositions, yes.

Q. Have you ever testified in any court

about what you're telling me today, the same --

essentially the same subject?

A. Yes. I have testified in Congressional

hearings and all that, and I don't know if I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1874

have testified in courts or not, but I have

testified under oath in depositions.

Q. Where you gave the same type

information you're giving me today, right?

A. Generally. I mean, I can't account for

every minute and things of that nature but --

Q. After you crossed the border, did you

go back to Laredo then after this time?

A. No. Once we got to -- once we crossed

the border from Laredo back into the United

States with the tire, we picked up -- we never

did go back to --

Q. Laredo?

A. The United States. No, we went

straight into the interior of Mexico.

Q. Okay. Where did you go in Mexico?

A. Well, we went to the customs house as I

mentioned, and then after -- after he was held

up briefly there or maybe a little longer than

briefly, after he caught up with me, which was

several miles down the road, three or four or

five, he pulled over in front of me and he got

out and, you know, got in the Mustang. I

pulled over to the side of the road.

Q. Okay. Did you go then to some city in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1875

Mexico where you spent some time?

A. No, I didn't. No. He just told me

that he wanted me to -- what he wanted me to do

and he gave me two thousand dollars and he told

me that -- he gave me another story about the

passport. And at that time I more or less gave

up on the passport.

Q. Where did you go then?

A. Well, he just -- he took off. I don't

know where he went. I went to --

Q. He left with this other -- same other

person that brought him?

A. Yes. He told me -- what he told me, he

told me he came -- he said he was going to

write to the general delivery, and I told him I

was going to Los Angeles probably, and he would

write me a general delivery in Los Angeles.

And then after financial transactions and the

photographing equipment, I had it, and he said,

just keep it, he didn't want it at that time

and after that he left.

Q. Had there been any mention of any guns

at that time, to purchase any guns?

A. Not -- I don't believe -- I don't

believe -- no. I think that came later on.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1876

Q. All right. Then did you then go to Los

Angeles?

A. I subsequently went to Los Angeles,

yes.

Q. And how long did you stay there?

A. I went there in November, I believe,

about November. The middle of November of

1967.

Q. 1967?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. And is this the time when you

attended the bartending school?

A. Yes, I did attend the bartending school

there.

Q. All right. Mr. Ray, did you become

acquainted with some people in Los Angeles that

you had never known before while you were out

there?

A. Yes. I became acquainted with one

individual.

Q. What was that individual's name?

A. Her name was Marie Martin.

Q. M A R T I N?

A. Yes.

Q. And did you then transport some

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1877

individuals to New Orleans while you were in

Los Angeles?

A. Yes. I -- Raul had contacted me

and -- initially I wasn't going to get involved

with it any more but he wrote me a general

delivery at the main post office and he asked

me to contact him or something. I called him

at New Orleans and he wanted to see me a

certain date, an approximate certain date, and

I did agree to go to New Orleans and I went

down there with an individual named Charles

Stein. He helped me drive down there.

Q. Okay. S T E I N?

A. S T E I N, yes.

Q. And did some other -- were there other

individuals that accompanied you and Mr. Stein?

A. Not on the way down. On the way back

there was two young girls, five or six years

old, they came back with us.

Q. Was there some time in Los Angeles that

you were out there -- let me back up a minute.

You were out there you said about October of

1967 or November.

A. November.

Q. 1967. Now, were you ever back in Los

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1878

Angeles after that?

A. After November?

Q. Right.

A. Yes. I stayed there until March, yes.

Q. Okay. So you stayed in Los Angeles

from November until March.

A. Yes.

Q. During that time you were there, did

you -- did you suggest or direct some

individuals to go and register to vote and that

they would support Governor Wallace for

president?

A. No, no, that's not correct. That's

sort of a --

Q. That's not true?

A. No. The way that transpired was that

Marie Martin's husband was in the -- apparently

was in San Quentin on a drug charge and she was

interested in getting involved in politics and

trying to get her, you know, brother out of the

penitentiary. So anyway I may have mentioned

to her -- I had been down there on Lackershime

Street in Hollywood. I think it's in North

Hollywood, California. Well, it's -- it is

somewhere down there, I know it's on

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1879

Lackershime Boulevard, and I went down there

and purchased a tire for the Mustang and I

noticed the registration place. I assumed it

was for anyone who wanted to register to vote.

So anyway she mentioned this to me,

and I told her that, you know, I would take her

down there if she wanted to register. So the

day that I was going to take her down there,

she had two individuals with her named Charles

Stein, that's the first time I saw Charles

Stein, and she had another young lady with her

and I don't know what her name was, but they

were related. So I took her out there and she

was -- apparently she registered for George

Wallace.

So subsequently she kept -- you know,

she brought up the subject several times again,

and I told her at that time that the problem --

if she was interested in getting in politics,

she should have registered with the Republicans

because they controlled the state. I think

Governor Reagan was governor at that time. So

she went and re-registered then for the

Republicans and she showed me her registration

slip. She was all enthusiastic about this

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1880

idea, but I never was -- I never thought much

of it. I was just going along with her

because, I mean, she couldn't have -- she was a

barmaid, and I imagine if she raised about five

hundred dollars she wasn't seeing the governor

with five hundred dollars. She would have

probably got, you know, locked up or something

like that for some nonsense.

Q. Were you ever in Selma, Alabama,

Mr. Ray?

A. I have been through there one time,

yes.

Q. All right. Weren't you there at the

same time that Doctor King was there, the time

you were there, wasn't he there, too?

A. If he was there, I wouldn't have knew

about it, but I -- subsequently I found out

that he wasn't there when I was there.

Q. How did you find out about that?

A. I think William Bradford Huie, the

writer we previously mentioned, said I was in

Selma when Doctor King was there but later on I

find out that wasn't true and I wasn't in

there. I just drove through there. I wasn't,

you know, a resident there.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1881

Q. Let me ask you this: Isn't it true

that a map was found with your fingerprints on

it that had Doctor King's home, his church, his

place of meeting, all that was circled, wasn't

that all found?

A. No, that's not true. There was a map

found in the rooming house that I was in in

Atlanta, Georgia. In fact, I had about 20

maps. I had marked some different maps. What

I did I marked the street I was living on and

the street I came in on and then I marked

Peachtree Street which is right off the street

I was living on. And of course that was

distorted and said that I had Reverend King's

house and church and residences and I had all

circles around it. Well, we subsequently found

out that wasn't true, which I knew it wasn't.

Q. You're saying that's not true. That

the map that the FBI had with your fingerprints

on it did not have any circles around the exact

place where Doctor Martin King's church, his

home and his meeting place were, is that what

you're saying?

A. Yes. What I did I made three oblong

circles on there as I recall. Now --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1882

Q. Go ahead, I'm sorry.

A. One was first, when I usually go into a

large town I usually buy a map to try to get my

bearings with me and find out where I'm at and

things of that nature. And I put the street

where I thought we had come in on and then I

put an oblong circle around Peachtree Street

and one around where I was living at.

And I had put an X down at an area

which is a restaurant I had went to, and I

don't think any -- I think maybe one of them

had enclosed Reverend King's house or

something. But the map, I have seen a copy of

the map, and there is no, you know, circles

around his house.

Q. Did you know where Doctor King's church

was located?

A. I had no idea.

Q. Do you know where his home was located?

A. No.

Q. How long had you had this map?

A. I had purchased it as soon as I had

arrived in Atlanta.

Q. Okay. When you were in Los Angeles

where were you staying, what motel or hotel

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1883

were you staying in?

A. I was staying in an apartment house on

Serrano Boulevard.

Q. Did you leave Los Angeles from November

until March to go on a -- any other trip except

New Orleans while you were out there?

A. Yes. I went to New Orleans in December

and then a lot of things happened in February

and in March. Initially when we -- when I met

Raul in December, he said we would take some

guns into Mexico in that spring or early --

initially the date was set for April. But he

set the date up for March and consequently I

had to do quite a few changes there before I

could --

Q. Where did you go except New Orleans

when you left Los Angeles during this time, did

you go to any other city?

A. I went to Las Vegas, yes, once and that

was it.

Q. Now, you said you met Raul. Was that

in Los Angeles or was that in New Orleans? I'm

talking about from November until March when

you said you were in Los Angeles.

A. Yes, I met him in March, yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1884

Q. You had not seen him in New Orleans

when you were there?

A. Yes, I had met him there.

Q. Where did you meet him there?

A. A place called the Le Bunny Lounge on

Canal Street.

Q. Did you call him ahead of time? Had

you told him you were coming?

A. No, I -- when I got to -- yes, he knew

I was coming because he told me, and I had made

some phone call or I wrote him -- one time I

wrote him a letter and I think he wrote me a

letter. But I don't recall details. But I

think most of our transactions were made on the

phone, and he had me meet him there a certain

date in New Orleans in March of 1968.

Q. Okay. When you went with Mr. Stein,

what month was that?

A. That would have been in November. That

would have been -- wait a minute, that would

have been December.

Q. December of 1967?

A. 1967, yes.

Q. Did you see Raul then?

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1885

Q. Okay. Where did you meet him then?

A. Le Bunny Lounge.

Q. Okay. Same place?

A. Yes.

Q. How long did you stay in New Orleans

when you were down there?

A. Really not very long. As soon as I

seen him, I was ready to leave.

Q. Did you get -- did he give you any

money?

A. He gave me five hundred dollars, yes.

Q. Did he tell you he had any job he

wanted you to do or anything?

A. Yes. He explained in general terms.

Q. What was that?

A. Well, he was going to take some weapons

into Mexico.

Q. When did he tell you he wanted you to

do that?

A. It was something mentioned, I don't

know just what it was about, about we was going

to do this in April of 1968 or he might have

mentioned it later on the phone, his associate.

Q. When you were in New Orleans in

December, are we talking about three or four

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1886

days, a week, two weeks, what?

A. That I was there?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. It couldn't have been more than two or

three days because I was ready to leave the

next day. Stein wanted to stay a couple of

extra days so I think we stayed probably two or

three days.

Q. Okay. The next time you saw Raul was

in March after that?

A. Yes, March.

Q. Mr. Ray, have you ever heard of an

individual named J. C. Hardin?

A. J. C. Hardin?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. I believe I have heard of someone named

Hardin, yes.

Q. Where did you hear that?

A. I think someone mentioned it to me

named Harold Wiseberg.

Q. What did Mr. Wiseberg tell you about

him?

A. I guess there's so much of this

information I can't get it all down. I think

Wiseberg said that I met him in Los Angeles.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1887

Q. Did you meet him in Los Angeles?

A. No, I didn't. I don't --

Q. Have you ever met a J. C. Hardin or

James Hardin?

A. No.

Q. You have never met him?

A. No. The reason I know that -- I didn't

meet anyone in New Orleans so -- I mean, Los

Angeles except the individuals I have done

mentioned.

Q. Okay. Okay. You stayed in Los Angeles

until March of 1968?

A. Yes.

Q. And where did you meet Raul next after

that after seeing him in New Orleans in

December, when and where did you meet him next?

A. Well, in one of the phone -- well, in

one of the phone conversations, I was supposed

to meet him in New Orleans on a certain day.

When I got there, he wasn't there.

Q. And about when was that? About what

month was that we're talking about?

A. Well, this would have been March,

sometime in the latter part of March.

Q. And in between December and March, had

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1888

you had any contact with him?

A. Yes, I had contact with him.

Q. By telephone?

A. Yes. And plus in December meeting with

him in New Orleans.

Q. Now, in December when you met him in

New Orleans, you met him at the Le Bunny

Lounge, how long were you with him that time?

A. Not very long, 15 or 20 minutes.

Q. And you didn't see him any more except

that one time while you were in New Orleans?

A. Just that one time, yes.

Q. You had talked to him on the telephone

sometime after December of 1967?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. And where did he tell you

he was going to meet you?

A. I didn't talk to him directly. I

talked to the intermediary. I was doing

certain things out there in the -- I was trying

to get a passport, Merchant Seaman's paper and

all that stuff. And I can't remember all the

sequences what happened on certain days. But

anyway the gist of it is that we made -- he set

the date up where I was supposed to meet him in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1889

New Orleans. It was sometime in March of 1968

and --

Q. You were in Los Angeles from November

until March?

A. Yes.

Q. How were you getting financing?

A. Well, I went down in December, I told

him I was getting kind of low on money and he

gave me five hundred dollars. Plus I also

got -- he give me two thousand dollars in

Mexico, so I didn't have a whole lot of money

but, you know, I wasn't missing any meals or

anything like that.

Q. Well, at some point you had some

plastic surgery.

A. Yes.

Q. In Los Angeles.

A. Yes.

Q. What month was that?

A. Well, that would have been March or

February, probably February.

Q. Of 1968?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Now you had twenty-five hundred

dollars from November up until February.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1890

A. Well, I also had some money when I came

back from Canada, but I have got this all wrote

down on papers and things. But I can't

remember, you know, from --

Q. Did you work any job in Los Angeles?

A. No, I never did any -- I never did work

any.

Q. Did you do any robberies while you were

in Los Angeles?

A. No, I didn't.

Q. Now, at that time you -- I guess I

asked you earlier, you had never been to

Memphis, Tennessee, had you, at that point?

A. No.

Q. We are talking about in February 1968.

A. To the best of my recollection, the

only thing that -- I went south, I went in the

south in 1955. I could have come through there

but I don't know which town in the south I went

through. If I had have been there, I would

have just drove through and that would have

been it.

Q. Now, you had this surgery in February

of 1968 in Los Angeles.

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1891

Q. Do you remember how much you paid for

that?

A. Very little. I think it was $200 or

$250.

Q. How much did you pay for the bartending

course?

A. I don't know how much. That was one

hundred -- I would say I think it was a hundred

and twenty dollars. I don't know what it was.

Q. And you next saw Raul then in March of

1968?

A. Yes.

Q. And where did you see him?

A. The Starlight Club in Birmingham.

Q. Okay. When did you leave Los Angeles

to go to Birmingham?

A. Well, sometime in -- I'm just guessing,

probably the 22nd or 23rd of March, sometime

around there. I can't --

Q. Did you veer off and stay in any other

city for any length of time between Los Angeles

and Birmingham?

A. No, I came --

Q. Straight to Birmingham?

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1892

Q. And he told you he would meet you

there; is that right?

A. Well, I got -- I was supposed to meet

him in New Orleans, but when I got to New

Orleans, I called his number and his

intermediary told me to met him in the

Starlight in Birmingham. And he went on ahead,

he went on ahead to Alabama.

Q. Okay. Now, is that when you -- from

New Orleans you had gone then through Selma,

Alabama?

A. Yes. When I left New Orleans to go to

Birmingham, I think it was two roads that goes

to Birmingham, and I got on the secondary road.

I think that's when -- I went through various

small towns.

Q. Okay. Mr. Ray, isn't it true that not

only in Selma, but other cities you were

there -- just happen to be there when Doctor

King was there and other cities before that?

A. I don't know what cities that would be.

What cities was I --

Q. Wasn't he in Los Angeles while you were

out there?

A. I was out there first. I mean, he come

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1893

in to town.

Q. Okay. Of course, you were in Atlanta

while he was there, weren't you?

A. Yes, I was in Atlanta, yes.

Q. Okay.

A. I think he was in Chicago when I was

there, but I was already there. So I mean, you

couldn't say that, you know, he was following

me. And I certainly wasn't following him if I

was there first.

Q. Have you ever made the admission to any

person that you were stalking Doctor King?

A. Did I?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. No. I have never admitted --

Q. You have never admitted to any person?

A. I have been accused of stalking him,

but I have never --

Q. Were you ever stalking him?

A. No, I wasn't stalking him.

Q. Have you ever told anyone that you were

stalking him?

A. No.

Q. You have never told anyone?

A. No.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1894

Q. When you were in Jim's Grill, did you

see Mr. Jowers there, Mr. Ray?

A. No, I didn't. When I first went in

there, there was a -- I was in there twice.

There's a possibility I was in there a third,

but I think I was just in there twice. I

thought the first time I was in there there was

a young either black or white woman there. And

the second time I was in there it was either a

black or white. Now I don't remember the

sequence. I don't remember if the first time

was black and the second time was white or the

other way around. But subsequently I was told

that there was no white woman in there, so --

but I was just in there three or four minutes

so I really don't know.

Q. The first time you were in there on

April 4th, 1968, what time roughly were you in

there?

A. Pardon?

Q. What time roughly were you in there?

A. Well, I must have been -- it must have

been somewhere around -- it was after -- it

was -- I was late getting there. I would say

it was after four o'clock.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1895

Q. Now, Mr. Ray, you had gotten into

Selma, Alabama, and gone into -- gone on into

Atlanta or Birmingham?

A. Birmingham.

Q. Birmingham. All right. And you met

Raul there?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. Where did you meet him?

A. The Starlight.

Q. Okay. And what did he tell you then he

wanted you to do?

A. Well, he -- we was going to Atlanta.

He said, you know, we was going to drive to

Atlanta.

Q. He was going to ride with you in your

Mustang?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. How long were you in Birmingham

before you left to go to Atlanta?

A. Very shortly. Very shortly. I just --

Q. Talking about days, six days, five

days, a week, what, before you --

A. Well, when I met him at the

Starlight --

Q. Yes, sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1896

A. Before we went to Atlanta, probably

about five minutes.

Q. You left that same day?

A. Yes.

Q. To go to Atlanta? Had you been in

Atlanta before this?

A. Not unless I went through there in

1955.

Q. When you were talking about earlier?

A. Yes.

Q. You had never been to Atlanta?

A. No.

Q. What did he want to go to Atlanta for?

A. I didn't -- I didn't want to go there.

He --

Q. I said what did he tell you he wanted

you to go to Atlanta for?

A. Well, he didn't tell me at that time.

Q. Did you get -- did he give you any

money then?

A. No, he didn't.

Q. So you drove on into Atlanta, and where

did you stay there?

A. Well, he just directed me around to

kind of a rundown neighborhood. Well, it

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1897

really wasn't rundown, but it wasn't a working

class neighborhood. We drove around briefly

until he seen or I seen a place rooms for rent.

So he told me to go in there and try to rent a

room in the place.

So I went in there and the landlord,

some dude, he was -- him and another guy were

drinking wine and I was trying to rent a room

from them. So I kept trying to, you know, rent

the room and I couldn't make much sense out of

him. So finally, you know, he was going to

rent me a room.

Q. Who was going to rent you a room?

A. The guy. I assume it was the landlord

at the time.

Q. Okay. Was Raul with you?

A. Pardon?

Q. Was Raul --

A. He was out in the car.

Q. Did you tell him you wanted a room for

two people or for one person?

A. No, just me.

Q. Okay. Where was he going to stay?

A. Well, I don't know where he was going

to stay.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1898

Q. Okay.

A. So he -- the guy told me he would rent

me a room. So Raul came in about that time

and him and this -- these other two guys were

drinking wine so the guy said that, you know,

he would rent me a room and I paid for it. And

he -- let's see, he put me -- he rented me a

room there, but I think it was someone else's

room or something.

Q. Someone else's room?

A. Yes. I told you he was drunk. So he

rented me the room of someone else.

Q. Is this a rooming house you're speaking

of?

A. Yes.

Q. Were you upstairs or downstairs where

he rented you the room?

A. It was downstairs.

Q. Okay.

A. And --

Q. You don't remember what street it was

on?

A. No. It was right off of Peachtree

Street. I can't recall. 14th Street or

something like that.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1899

Q. Was it close to the Ebenezer Baptist

Church, in that area?

A. No, I don't know whether it was or not.

I think -- subsequently I think it was about a

mile and a half from that, maybe farther than

that, three miles.

Q. How long did Raul tell you you were

going to be in Atlanta, Mr. Ray?

A. Well, he give me an impression we would

be there several days.

Q. And you still didn't know what it was

for, what you were going there for?

A. Well, he didn't give me no details

then. What he told me then was that he was

going to come back, and I might explain

something else. See, when he give me the wrong

room, when the guy, the landlord sobered up, he

put me in, you know, a different room which was

right next door. He had two rooming houses,

his sister did, and he was just the landlord.

So he give me a room right next door. And

after I got to the room, me and Raul went

around to talk to a restaurant around the

corner from Peachtree Street, a diner. And he

told me that he would be back in three or four

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1900

days and that he would go to -- he wanted to

make a trip to Miami. So --

Q. Did he take your car?

A. No. He didn't take the car. No, I

kept the Mustang.

Q. You said he was in the Mustang waiting

for you, how did he leave after you had checked

in the room at the rooming house?

A. Well, he just -- when we went out the

grill, we had some -- we had some lunch. I

don't know how, he just walked off. I didn't

see him.

Q. What grill was that?

A. Well, you go down to -- the street I

was on, you walk about a half, three quarters

of a block maybe and you get on Peachtree

Street and I turned right and we went about a

block down and there's a diner that sits there.

It's kind of a small place, and I think it was

a white villa.

Q. Mr. Ray, now you have known Raul some

several months at this point. Did you ever

know where he was from at this point? Was he

from Mexico, the United States, Canada, where

was he from?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1901

A. I never made no inquiries. I didn't

ask him for his address.

Q. You never asked him his last name?

A. No, I didn't.

Q. Well, you had many, many conversations

with him and had been with him many, many times

at this point.

A. I don't know if I had many. I had

brief conversations with him. It was all

business, but I never had no occasion to ask

him, you know, what his name was and where he

was from and things of that nature. It was

just a business deal rather. It wasn't no

social.

Q. What kind of business deal was it?

A. Well, it was illegal business deals.

Q. I mean, well, other than the fact you

had driven a car across the border a couple of

times, what other illegal business was it

besides those two things?

A. It was nothing. That was it. That

was -- I thought that was enough.

Q. Okay. You had gone to Atlanta. You

went to some place, you don't know where it

was, and you had gotten a room and this

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1902

gentleman put you in the wrong room. But at

any rate you went back to the car and got with

Raul and had gone to a grill. Is that --

A. No, we didn't get in the car. We just

walked.

Q. You walked to the grill?

A. Yes.

Q. And how long did you stay there?

A. I would say 15 or 20 minutes.

Q. Did you get anything to eat?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. And you say Raul just

vanished into the night somewhere?

A. Yes. After we talked a while he said

that -- you know, he told me to stay pretty

close to the rooming house because he would be

back in three or four days. I think it was --

and we would take a trip to Miami.

Q. Okay. Well, did you stay three or four

days? Did you stay in the rooming house three

or four days?

A. There was some mention about it, I

don't recall exactly how many days, but anyway

he was going to come back and we were going to

Miami.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1903

Q. And did he come back and you go to

Miami?

A. No.

Q. When did you return from -- when did

you hear from him next?

A. Well, he came back and it was six or

seven days more than likely.

Q. All right. And you had been there all

that time? Had he given you any more money?

A. Not at that time, no.

Q. How much money did you have?

A. At that time?

Q. We are talking about March of 1968.

A. I've got -- I have got it wrote down

some place. I didn't check it when I came up

here because I --

Q. When did you write it down?

A. But I didn't have a whole lot --

pardon?

Q. When did you write it down?

A. How much money I had?

Q. Oh, you wrote it down back then, and

kept it until now?

A. No, I wrote -- when I testify in court

or something, I go over it because I can't

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1904

remember it all. I can just remember how much

money I got, but I can't remember the specific

amount I had. I would say I probably had a

thousand dollars. No, I had probably over a

thousand dollars at that time.

Q. All right. You saw him some six or

seven days later. Did he come by or call you

or how did he contact you?

A. No, he came over to the rooming house

and he had problems. He had a problem getting

in. The -- I can't explain exactly how it is,

but the rooms set inside the -- in other words,

you come in the front door. You don't go right

in the room. It used to be doctor's offices

and you had to pound on the door.

Q. To get in?

A. Yes.

Q. And then when you saw him, what did he

want then when he came to the door?

A. When he came back --

Q. I mean, what did he want?

A. When he came back, he mentioned the

fact that he was going to take some, you know,

weapons into Mexico and he wanted me to

purchase a rifle and check up some samples in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1905

Atlanta, and at this time I told him that I

didn't think I should do it in Atlanta because

all my identifications were from Alabama. So

he agreed to, you know, to do these

transactions in Alabama.

Q. Now, he wanted you to purchase a rifle

and you said do some samples? What kind of

samples, what are you speaking of?

A. Well, he wanted me to look at some

foreign rifles and get an estimate on the

prices of them.

Q. Okay. Well, now, you hadn't had any

experience with rifles. How did you know where

to go look for foreign rifles at this point?

A. When we got to Birmingham?

Q. No, sir, you said in Atlanta. He came

to the rooming house, had trouble getting in

and he got in and told you he wanted you to

look for some rifles and some samples were the

words you used I believe.

A. Yes.

Q. How did you know where to look for

foreign rifles?

A. Well, I didn't know where to look. But

when we got to Birmingham, as I mentioned, I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1906

didn't want to try to -- I didn't know what the

procedure was for buying rifles. I didn't know

what type of identification you had to show or

whatever and I didn't know anything about the

law.

Q. What type of rifle did he tell you he

wanted you to buy?

A. He didn't. He didn't say.

Q. Are you talking about hunting rifles

like .22's or a higher caliber than that, what

type rifles?

THE COURT: Go ahead.

A. Well, he didn't say -- well, he didn't

say in Atlanta. He didn't get into details. I

just -- you know, when we started talking about

purchasing weapons in Atlanta, I said -- you

know, kind of said, hold on a minute. My

identification is from Alabama, and I think it

probably would be safer if we used -- if I went

to Alabama.

Q. What kind of rifle did you think he

wanted you to buy?

A. Well, he explained that when we got to

Birmingham and checked -- well, he explained

that when we got to Birmingham and checked into

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1907

the motel.

Q. All right. When he came over this day

to the rooming house where he had trouble

getting in and told you he wanted you to go

look about some rifles and so forth, how long

did he stay then?

A. He didn't stay very long at all.

Q. Are we talking about fifteen minutes,

ten minutes, half a day or what?

A. No, I don't think -- I don't think he

stayed. After he once got in, I don't think he

stayed there over maybe thirty minutes or

something.

Q. Did he give you any money?

A. Not at that time, no.

Q. Okay. Mr. Ray, now you're telling us

he came in and you said he had trouble getting

in and he came in, and the first thing he said

was, I want you to go buy some rifles or look

about some rifles at the --

A. Yes. We started talking about the gun

deals and things like that. I can't quote

everything he said, but the main thing he

wanted, you know, me to check out some rifles.

Q. Is this the first time he had ever

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1908

mentioned anything about any guns up to this

point? You had known him for months.

A. He had said something about it in

Mexico, I mean, I think in December of 1968 --

December of 1967 when I went to New Orleans

about taking something to Mexico. But I think

he said something about, you know, guns and he

would make quite a bit of money on weapons or

something like that.

Q. What did he say specifically?

A. I can't say what he said specifically.

I know he just made a general reference to what

he wanted to do.

Q. All right. And how long did you -- how

long was it before you left to go to

Birmingham?

A. It wasn't very long. I don't think it

was over a half an hour.

Q. So you went the same day?

A. Yes.

Q. Was it day or night when he came over

there?

A. It was -- it was sometime during the

day, but I can't specify just what time during

the day it was.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1909

Q. Okay. And you -- he told you he would

go with you in the Mustang to Birmingham?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. And you had -- what type of

identification did you have at that time?

A. Well, I had the Eric S. Galt driver's

license in Alabama. I had a bill of sale from

Alabama, a certificate of sale or something.

Alabama doesn't have a title so --

Q. Okay. When you were in Los Angeles

taking the bartender's course, and I may have

asked you earlier, what name did you use then?

A. I'm certain I used the Galt name there.

Q. All right. And then when you -- when

you were in Atlanta and you -- did they ask you

your name there in Atlanta when you were in the

rooming house where the man was drunk, did they

ask you your name?

A. I think they gave me a receipt. Yes, I

think I used the Galt name there.

Q. All right.

A. I'm fairly certain.

Q. When you left Atlanta to go to

Birmingham now, you were driving the Mustang

and Raul was with you.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1910

A. Yes.

Q. Right? Okay. Anyone else come up with

you or anyone else appear with you that day

that he came up and told you that he wanted to

purchase some rifles?

A. No, there wasn't. No.

Q. You don't know how he got there?

A. No.

Q. How he got to the rooming house, you

hadn't heard anything from him now for days?

A. Yes, he showed just up, yes.

Q. You don't know where he was staying or

living or anything?

A. No, I don't.

Q. Okay. You left Atlanta to go to

Birmingham and where were you intending to go

in Birmingham?

A. Well, I didn't intend to go anywhere.

He was more or less giving directions, but we

went on to Birmingham.

Q. But I mean, did he sound like he knew

where to go in Birmingham?

A. Yes.

Q. To buy rifles?

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1911

Q. Did he give you the name of some place?

A. Well, we went to -- when we got there,

we went to a -- I think this was on a Friday.

We went to a diner and I think he checked -- we

checked out the yellow pages. We may have

checked out a newspaper, too, but he may have

already knew in advance. I'm not going to

speculate what he knew. But anyway, he decided

on this Arrow Marine Supply, and he give me,

you know, general directions. And he told me

he wanted to purchase -- he told me -- he told

me he wanted to purchase --

Q. Okay. Well now, did he go with you?

A. No. I recall he went somewhere with me

but he -- I don't know if he went down there

with me or not. We was driving around, but I

don't -- I don't think he ever went -- he

didn't go -- I know he didn't go all the way

with me to the Arrow Marine Supply where they

sold the rifles. He may have took me on the

road and showed me where it was at or something

of that nature.

Q. You had never been there previously?

A. No, I hadn't.

Q. All right. Did he tell you what type

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1912

of weapon he wanted you to take a look at?

A. No, he didn't specify. If he did, I

forgot it. But he was talking about -- when I

got there, I asked for a deer rifle I think it

was.

Q. Why did you ask for that?

A. Well, that's usually I think, you know,

rifle. That's the type of rifles he used. But

I don't know too much about rifles so I got it

all --

Q. But he had not specified what caliber

rifle to purchase or what type of anything, any

brand or anything; is that correct?

A. Yes. I don't recollect him mentioning

any specific item. He said something about a

rifle and he asked to check on some foreign

rifles. But if he mentioned the type of

rifles, a specific thing he wanted, I probably

have forgotten about it.

Q. Well, did he want a rifle with a scope

on it or without a scope or --

A. Yes.

Q. One that had a lever down under it that

you used or what kind of rifle did he tell you

to look at?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1913

A. Well, I don't know. I don't quite

understand why he wasn't more specific about it

but he didn't -- you know, on reflection but he

didn't. He probably give me some directions

but they wasn't good enough to where I could

tell the salesman exactly what I wanted.

Q. Did he write them down?

A. I -- did I?

Q. Did he write them down for you?

A. No, he didn't write them down.

Q. And you just presumed that he wanted a

rifle with a scope on it like a deer rifle?

A. Yes.

Q. You presume that; is that correct?

A. Yes.

Q. Did he give you any money?

A. Yes. He gave me I think it was about

$750.

Q. Okay. Was that in large bills or small

bills?

A. That was in small bills.

Q. All right. And did he tell you to

spend $750 for a rifle?

A. No, he didn't. I think some of it was

for expenses.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1914

Q. Okay. And then you drove over to this

Arrow Marine Supply?

A. Yes.

Q. And you had never been there before?

A. Yes.

Q. And was it near the -- was it near some

water?

A. I didn't see any water around there.

That was the first time I had been there. I

think there may have been an airport around

there somewhere.

Q. And you don't recall if Raul rode over

there with you or not to this place?

A. I have some recollection of him being

in the car. I think maybe he give me -- he

took me out there and pointed me off where to

go at, but I'm certain he was -- he didn't -- I

know he wasn't with me when I purchased the

rifle.

Q. Okay. When you went into the place

where to purchase the rifle, Mr. Ray, how many

people were in there?

A. It didn't seem to be too many people in

there.

Q. You're talking about three or four?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1915

A. It was a salesman, a couple of salesmen

and maybe a couple of other people.

Q. And what did you tell him you wanted?

A. Well, I told him I wanted to -- I was

meeting with my brother-in-law and my brother

was going deer hunting, and I would like to get

a deer rifle and also there was a rack of

apparently German mulzer rifles over there and

I went over there and made some inquiries about

them and asked them how much they cost and he

kind of acted like he wanted to discourage me

from purchasing them so I assumed he wanted me

to buy the more expensive rifle.

Q. Did he show you more than one rifle

while you were there?

A. No. He showed me -- I think it was

just one.

Q. Did you tell him what brand you wanted?

A. No. I made it appear like I was buying

it for someone else, my brother-in-law or

something.

Q. All right. And what name did you give

him?

A. I gave him the name Harvey Lowmeier.

Q. Okay. Where did you come up with that?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1916

A. I think Harley Lowmeier is someone -- I

think he's some character in jail with my

brother one time, and I just used his name.

Q. Okay. Did you test fire the rifle

while you were in there?

A. No, I didn't.

Q. Okay. Did you tell him you wanted some

ammunition to go with it?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. What kind of rifle did he sell

you?

A. I don't know. He just showed me one

and he said this, you know, is a deer rifle and

I said, well, okay. Wrap it up and that was

it.

Q. Okay. How long were you in there,

Mr. Ray, before you purchased the gun?

A. I wasn't in there too long except -- I

think -- I don't know what kind of adjustments

he had to make on the rifle or whether he had

to put the scope on or what. But however long

it took. I didn't hang around there.

Q. Let me ask you something: When he --

when he showed you the rifle, you looked at it,

didn't you?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1917

A. Yes.

Q. I mean, you put it in your hands,

didn't you?

A. Yes.

Q. All right.

A. I may have put it in my hands. I

probably did, yes.

Q. How did -- did he show you how to load

it?

A. I can't remember all the details. He

probably showed me something about it. He

probably figured I had sense enough to load the

rifle.

Q. Tell us about the rifle, what kind --

did it have a lever under it?

A. I don't have no idea what it was. I

just -- he showed it to me and it looked like a

rifle so I said, you know, wrap it up.

Q. When you first saw it, did it have a

scope on it?

A. I don't know if it did or not.

Q. You didn't look through the scope to

see what kind of sighting or bearing it had?

A. No.

Q. And did the scope have some little

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1918

rubber tips on the ends -- on each end to keep

from getting scratched up, do you remember

that?

A. No, I don't remember any of that.

Q. Was it in a box or did he just have it

back behind the counter or was it on the glass

counter or where did he have the rifle?

A. I can't recall. He just brought it out

and showed me. He said, how is this? And I

said, okay, wrap it up.

Q. So you walked in and didn't tell him

what kind of rifle you wanted, what brand, what

caliber, what anything, you just said I want a

deer rifle?

A. Yes. I told him I was going to hunt

deers with my brother-in-law and I would like

to look at some rifles, and he said, this is

what you want. This is probably the best thing

out. He said words to that effect. I said,

okay, that's what I want.

Q. And he never showed you how it had to

be loaded or what you do to load it or

anything?

A. He may have, but I don't recall it if

he did.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1919

Q. Did you specify you wanted one with a

scope on it?

A. Yes.

Q. You did?

A. Uh-huh.

Q. All right. And why did you do that?

What was the reasons for wanting one with a

scope on it?

A. Well, he -- Raul had asked me to get

one with a scope on it.

Q. He had told you that?

A. Yes.

Q. How many guns did Raul tell you to

get?

A. He asked me to get one as a display to

some buyers and he asked me to check on the

prices and the quantity of some foreign made

rifles.

Q. Okay. Well, Mr. Ray, did you ever ask

Raul why he wanted you to purchase these in

Atlanta or Birmingham, why you didn't purchase

them in New Orleans?

A. No, I didn't make no inquiries like

that.

Q. You didn't make any inquiries?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1920

A. No.

Q. Okay. You purchased a rifle and paid

him how much?

A. I don't recall that either.

Q. Okay. Did he write you a receipt for

it when you purchased it?

A. Yes. He gave me a receipt for it and

some ammunition, yes.

Q. Did you give him your name and your

address?

A. Yes. But I picked out a phony address.

Q. Where, in Birmingham or Atlanta or

where?

A. In Birmingham. Yes.

Q. All right. And you gave him your name?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you have to show him any

identification?

A. No, I didn't.

Q. Now, what time of the day are we

speaking of here that you went in to purchase

the rifle?

A. Well, I don't know. It was sometime

probably a little bit after lunchtime or -- it

wasn't -- eleven, twelve, one, somewhere around

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1921

there.

Q. Now, was Raul sitting in the car

waiting on you while you were doing this?

A. No, he wasn't.

Q. He was not doing that. Okay. How long

were you in the store roughly to purchase the

rifle?

A. I really couldn't say. Just long

enough for him to get it ready. I don't know

if he put the scope on it. I don't know how

long it takes to put a scope on. But it wasn't

very long.

Q. You paid him in cash, of course?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. And then you took the

rifle. When you left out of the store, was it

in a box or wrapped up some way?

A. I believe it was in a box, yes.

Q. And it had a scope on it, you knew

that?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. I had -- it had some ammunition

with it?

A. Yes.

Q. How many bullets did it have, did you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1922

purchase?

A. I think it was a couple of clips or

whatever they come in. And I also purchased

some -- this foreign -- some other type of

ammunition, but it's not on the bill of sale.

I don't know. They claim that -- I don't know

what they claim.

Q. What was the reason you purchased the

other type of ammunition?

A. Well, he told me to purchase some

ammunition so I purchased two different types

so he could take his choice.

Q. Okay. Were they the same caliber?

A. Yes.

Q. Same size?

A. Yes. Same size, yes.

Q. Just a different brand?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. So you had two boxes of

ammunition?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. You left out of the store

and where did you go then?

A. I went back to the motel, the Five

Points Motel that we were staying in.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1923

Q. Okay. Now, okay. You have lost me

now. You had gone from Atlanta to Birmingham.

I thought you said you went to some place and

looked to see where there was a diner or

something and you looked in a telephone

directory and went straight then to the gun

store?

A. Yes, we did.

Q. Where was the motel?

A. The motel was -- it was -- it was

somewhere on the east side of Atlanta -- not

Atlanta but Birmingham. It was a large motel.

The Five Points they call it.

Q. Okay. You left for the store where you

purchased the gun and went back to your car?

A. Yes.

Q. Parked out near I guess in front of the

store?

A. Yes.

Q. Where was Raul?

A. He was at the five -- he was at the

motel.

Q. But now, how did you know where to go

to a motel? You hadn't gotten a motel at that

point.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1924

A. Yes, we checked into the motel when we

first got there. I forgot to mention that.

Before we went to the diner grill, we checked

in the Five Points Motel.

Q. Did Raul stay at the motel?

A. Yes, he stayed there, yes.

Q. When did you go to the diner when you

looked into the telephone directory to purchase

a gun?

A. That happened after I had rented the

motel room, yes.

Q. But I thought you said he went with you

to the diner?

A. He did.

Q. Okay. But now you're saying he stayed

at the motel?

A. Well, he stayed at the motel when I

went to purchase the rifle.

Q. Okay. So you went to the diner and

then you took him back to the motel?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. You drove from the place

where you purchased the gun back straight to

the motel.

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1925

Q. How far was that roughly?

A. It's quite a ways. I don't remember

just --

Q. A mile, five miles?

A. I would say it was about two or three

miles, yes.

Q. Okay. You got back to the motel, was

he waiting for you?

A. Yes.

Q. Anyone with him?

A. No.

Q. Okay. And did you take the gun in?

A. Yes.

Q. What did he say about it?

A. Well, he just said it was -- he looked

at it briefly and he said it was the wrong kind

then.

Q. What did he mean by that?

A. Well, I don't know what he meant. He

just said it was the wrong kind of rifle.

Q. The wrong caliber, wrong brand, wrong

what?

A. I think he just said it was -- just the

wrong type.

Q. Okay. That was his words?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1926

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Did you ask him what he meant by

that or what he really wanted?

A. No, I didn't. I had a brochure, the

salesmen give me a brochure. So I just handed

him the brochure and told him to pick out what

he wanted and I would go back and --

Q. You mean a brochure of several rifles?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Had you asked him for that?

A. The salesman?

Q. Yes.

A. I think he just give it to me.

Q. Okay. Well, had he given you this

brochure before you bought this rifle?

A. No, I think he give it to me after,

when I got ready to leave. He probably just

handed it to me.

Q. All right. Did -- I gather Raul took

the gun out of the box when you got back to the

motel?

A. Yes.

Q. Did he look down the scope on it?

A. If he did, I didn't notice it. He

seemed just to look at it and checked it out

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1927

briefly and said it was the wrong type. I

think it was the wrong caliber.

Q. Did he put any guns in the -- did he

put any guns in the clip to see if they fit?

A. No, he didn't do anything with it, no.

Q. He didn't pull the trigger to see if

anything would work on it?

A. No.

Q. He didn't do anything?

A. No.

Q. Okay. What did he want you to do then?

A. Well, he wanted me to exchange it and I

told him, you know, to pick out what he wanted.

So I -- he picked out one and I went down and

made a phone call to Arrow Marine and told them

that I had purchased the wrong type of rifle

and they told me, well, bring it back and they

would exchange it. So --

Q. What did you tell them was wrong with

it?

A. I don't think I said anything right

then. I just told him I think it was the wrong

caliber or something.

Q. And they told you to bring it back?

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1928

Q. And you had this brochure and Raul had

picked out another type rifle he wanted you to

exchange for it?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. Did he give you any more

money?

A. No.

Q. Okay. Did you go on back then to

exchange it?

A. Yes.

Q. That same day?

A. I went back to exchange it the same day

and the salesman, he may have told me on the

phone, he said that he couldn't do it that day

but he could get to me -- he could fix it -- he

didn't have time. He could have it ready for

me some time the next day, next morning and --

Q. What time of day did you take it back?

A. It must have been getting kind of late

because he said he couldn't fix it. He

couldn't exchange it that day.

Q. Did Raul ride over there with you when

you were going to exchange it?

A. No, he didn't.

Q. He stayed in the motel?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1929

A. Yes.

Q. Did you have separate rooms or one room

at the motel?

A. Well, I rented my own room and he just

stayed in there.

Q. In the same room?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. All right. When you took it on

back that day to the store or did you --

A. Yes.

Q. -- wait until the next day, same day?

A. I took it back the same day.

Q. Did you leave it?

A. Yes, I left it.

Q. You left it. Okay. And you told him

what kind of rifle you wanted?

A. Yes. I just told him that, you know,

we was going hunting and I think I mentioned we

were going hunting in Wisconsin or somewhere.

And he said, well -- I know there was some

conversation about bigger deer in Wisconsin

than there are in Alabama.

Q. Was this the same person that you

talked to when you --

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1930

Q. Is this the same person that you talked

to when you purchased the gun?

A. I believe it was. Yes.

Q. And did you specify when you went back

what brand or what caliber of gun you wanted?

A. I just showed him the brochure, yes.

Q. And you told him that's what you

wanted?

A. Yes.

Q. Was it the same price as the other or

more or less?

A. I believe it was more. It's -- I'm not

certain.

Q. Okay. But -- now, at this point Raul

had not told you why he wanted a different type

of rifle, either brand or caliber or anything.

He just said it wasn't the right type?

A. Yes.

Q. That was his words?

A. Yes, that's --

Q. Okay. Did you -- well, you had

purchased two boxes of ammunition. Did you

take those back, too?

A. Yes.

Q. You took those back, too. Did he want

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1931

you to do that, to take the ammunition back or

was that your idea?

A. Well, I think -- I don't think I -- I

don't have a recollection of taking the

ammunition out of the car. I may have, but

naturally you take the ammunition out for a

different caliber rifle.

Q. Okay. What caliber rifle was this, the

first one that was purchased?

A. I don't know.

Q. What brand was it?

A. I don't know that either.

Q. Okay. All right. When you went back

then, you left the rifle and you took the

ammunition back and left it, too.

A. Yes.

Q. Is that correct?

A. I left all of it, yes.

Q. And then you went back to the motel?

A. Yes. After -- after I made the

arrangements, yes.

Q. You went back to the motel. Was Raul

there at the motel?

A. Yes, he was there.

Q. Okay. What did you do when you got

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1932

back?

A. Well, I told him that I had made the

arrangements to exchange the rifle. I may have

told him beforehand based on the telephone call

I got, but I know I told him. One time he

wanted me to come back when I made the phone

call they were going to have the rifle

exchanged and then he told me, you know, he

said okay. So he gave me an address to meet

him in Memphis and he said he was going

somewhere else.

MR. BLEDSOE: Okay. At this

point Mr. Garrison stated, Doctor Pepper, is

this a good place for us to stop? It's almost

five. At which point Mr. Pepper said, sure,

this is fine.

And that was the end of the first day

of the deposition. The end of this volume.

And Mr. Garrison has the second volume.

MR. GARRISON: You want to

continue?

THE COURT: Another volume?

MR. GARRISON: We are going to

read it all.

THE COURT: Well, we had all the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1933

excitement we can stand today. Ten o'clock,

Sheriff.

(Proceedings adjourned at 4:30 p.m.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1942

IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF SHELBY COUNTY,

TENNESSEE FOR THE THIRTIETH JUDICIAL

DISTRICT AT MEMPHIS

_______________________________________________

CORETTA SCOTT KING, et al,

Plaintiffs,

Vs. Case No. 97242

LOYD JOWERS, et al,

Defendants.

_______________________________________________

PROCEEDINGS

December 7th, 1999

VOLUME XIII

_______________________________________________

Before the Honorable James E. Swearengen,

Division 4, judge presiding.

_______________________________________________

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI,

RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

COURT REPORTERS

Suite 2200, One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

(901) 529-1999

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1943

- APPEARANCES -

For the Plaintiff: DR. WILLIAM PEPPER

Attorney at Law

New York City, New York

For the Defendant:

MR. LEWIS GARRISON

Attorney at Law

Memphis, Tennessee

Court Reported by:

MR. BRIAN F. DOMINSKI

Certificate of Merit

Registered Professional

Reporter

Daniel, Dillinger,

Dominski, Richberger &

Weatherford

22nd Floor

One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1944

- INDEX -

WITNESS: PAGE/LINE NUMBER

JAMES EARL RAY

DEPOSITION EXCERPTS READ...........1945, 10

BETTY JEAN SPATES

DEPOSITION EXCERPTS READ............2105, 10

MOTION FOR DIRECTED

VERDICT............................. 2131, 1

EXHIBIT PAGE/LINE

Exhibit 37..................... 2103, 12

Exhibit 38..................... 2104, 19

Exhibit 39..................... 2130, 6

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1945

THE COURT: We're ready for the

jury.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: Good morning. We

have some more excitement in store for you.

Mr. --

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, we'd

like to read the latter part of Mr. Ray's

deposition at this time.

THE COURT: All right.

(The conclusion of the March

12th, 1995, deposition of James Earl Ray was

read in its entirety to the jury with the

excerpts as noted as follows:)

MR. BLEDSOE: "James Earl Ray,

having been first duly sworn, was examined

and testified as follows, direct examination,

by Mr. Garrison.

Q. Mr. Ray, when we adjourned the

deposition yesterday, we had gotten to the

point where you had gone in, I believe, to

look at some rifles. I want to back up just

a bit before we start back with that and let

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1946

me ask you something.

Have you ever been known as

G-e-r-r-y, Gerry Ray? Have you ever used

that alias?

A. No, that's my brother's name.

Q. Okay. What about George Ray,

have you ever used that alias?

A. No, that's my father's name.

Q. Okay. What about Gery, Rayn,

R-a-y-n?

A. R-a-y-n? R-a-y-n-s -- you're

not talking about Ryan, R-y-a-n, are you?

Q. No, sir. I'm asking if you have

ever used the name of G-e-r-r-y, R-a-y-n?

A. No. That's another one --

that's my brother's alias.

Q. Okay. And what about G-e-r-r-y,

Gerry Raynes, R-a-y-n-e-s?

A. No, I have never heard of that

name.

Q. How about G-e-r-r-y,

R-a-i-n-e-s, have you ever used that alias?

A. No.

Q. Okay. What about Gerry Ryan,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1947

R-y-a-n, have you ever used that alias?

A. No, I have never used that name.

Q. Okay. Going back just a bit

before we get back to where we were

yesterday. You came through Selma, Alabama

from New Orleans; am I right, sir?

A. Yes.

Q. And you spent the night there,

didn't you?

A. Yes.

Q. At the Mango (Phonetic) Hotel --

Motel?

A. Yes. It was on -- it was on a

road. It wasn't in no city or town. It was

just a motel on the road.

Q. And, in fact, Dr. King was there

at the same time, wasn't he?

A. No, he wasn't.

Q. You're sure about that?

A. Well, I have checked the

records, and he was somewhere -- 100 miles

from there or somewhere.

Q. Okay. Then from Selma you went

on to Birmingham, did you not, sir?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1948

A Yes.

Q. Okay. And Raul had told you he

would meet you in Birmingham?

A. At the Starlight, yes.

Q. Okay. And what was the purpose

of going to Birmingham first?

A. Well, I was supposed to meet him

in New Orleans. When I got there, I called

his contact number, and he told me to go

ahead and meet him in Birmingham, that he had

done went to Birmingham.

Q. Okay. And you were going to

meet at the Starlight in Birmingham?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you meet him?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. And then where did you go

from there?

A. We went from there to Atlanta.

Q. Okay. At this point had he

mentioned anything to you about any guns?

A. Yes. He mentioned them

previously, but I don't know just when all he

mentioned it. I know he mentioned it in New

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1949

Orleans. He may have mentioned it in

December of '67. He may have mentioned them

before that, but I know there was guns

mentioned in Mexico.

Q. What I'm wondering, Mr. Ray, is

this: If he had mentioned to you about guns

in New Orleans and Birmingham, what was the

reason you went to Atlanta and then back to

Birmingham to buy a gun?

A. Well, I don't know. He wanted

to go to Atlanta. I didn't ask him why he

wanted to go there.

Q. Okay. Did he ride with you to

Atlanta from Birmingham?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Did you spend the night

in Birmingham?

A. No. We left there -- I met him

at the Starlight, and we left there probably

10 or 15 minutes after I got there.

Q. To go on to Atlanta?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. Now, you were in

Atlanta, and you stayed there. I believe you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1950

said the person that you -- at the place

where you were staying was intoxicated?

A. Yes.

Q. And did he ever see you with

Raul--

A. Yes.

Q. -- this gentleman?

He did see you with Raul?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Other than that gentleman

there at this location do you know if anyone

ever saw you with Raul at any point that you

know now who those people would have been?

A. Well, of course, these documents

are all classified. I think probably the

barmaid at the Starlight Lounge probably seen

us together because we was in there several

times, and also there was some people there

at the -- at this place where the intoxicated

landlord was in Atlanta.

Q. Uh-huh.

A. Someone apparently gave a

statement to the FBI that they saw me with

someone else. But I give that to a reporter

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1951

named McClellan, WSM Television in about

1979. I give the document to him, and I

never did get it back.

Q. Well, according to the FBI

report, the gentleman who operated the

rooming house in Atlanta says he never saw

you with anyone else.

A. Well, I don't know. He stayed

drunk all the time, so it's difficult -- what

he saw and what he didn't see.

Q. Okay. Now, were getting back to

the gun. You had gone to the place, the

Aeromarine Supply, to buy a gun. And when

you got there, what time of day was it

roughly?

A. It must have been sometime

around -- between eleven and one o'clock.

Q. Okay. And what day of the --

was this April date the 2nd, 3rd, 4th? When

was this that you --

A. Well, this apparently was March

the 28th or 29th, and I know it was on a

Friday.

Q. When you went in there, did

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1952

someone say, can I wait on you or can I help

you? What was done?

A. Yes. Well, the salesman, you

know, he just asked me what I wanted and what

he could do for me, and --

Q. Okay. What did you later learn

his name to be?

A. I've forgotten now. There was a

salesman there, and I think there was also a

co-owner there, but I can't recall either one

of them's name.

Q. Okay. All right. You just --

you told him you wanted to purchase a gun for

deer hunting?

A. I think something about a large

bore deer rifle. I believe that was the --

Q. And did he have one behind the

counter or where did he get the gun from?

A. I really don't recall. It's

kind of a big -- well, it wasn't a warehouse,

but it was a fairly big place, and I don't

know where he got it at.

Q. Did he put the gun in your hands

and let you look at it and feel of it and see

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1953

how heavy it was?

A. I really can't recall. I think

he probably did show it -- hand it to me or

something like that. I wanted to make it

appear like I knew something about it

probably.

Q. And how long did you look at it

before you decided to purchase it?

A. Well, not very long.

Q. Well, five minutes, ten minutes,

fifteen?

A. Probably less than that,

probably a couple of minutes.

Q. Did you look at any mechanism on

the gun to see how it operated?

A. No, I didn't.

Q. All right. And did you look at

any other guns where you actually were shown

some other guns?

A. I looked at some guns on a rack

up over on the -- on the -- not on his side

of the counter, on my side of the counter.

They were -- I believe they were Mausers. It

was a foreign gun -- foreign made rifles, and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1954

I asked him about the price of them, and --

Q. Did you actually handle those

guns?

A. I doubt it. I may have touched

one of them or something, but I don't believe

I handled them. No, I don't think so.

Q. Okay. How much did you pay for

this gun?

A. I really can't recall. It's

probably over $200 or somewhere around there,

I suppose.

Q. Okay. Now, you were in

Birmingham. And had Raul ridden from

Atlanta back to Birmingham with you?

A. From Birmingham -- how is --

Q. From Atlanta back to Birmingham.

You had gone back to Birmingham from

Atlanta to buy a gun?

A. Yes. He had ridden with me.

Q. He had waited where?

A. Where did he wait?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. He waited in the -- I'm kind of

inclined to think he waited in the Starlight

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1955

Club. And then I went and rented the motel,

the Five Points, and I think I picked him up.

I think he had something to do or

something. I'm not --- my memory is not too

well on this.

Q. Okay. When you purchased the

gun, then you had gone back to meet him?

A. Yes.

Q. And did he take the gun and

examine it and look down the scope and check

the mechanism and so forth?

A. Well, he looked it over, and I

don't know how close he looked it over, but

he just said it was the wrong type or the

wrong bore or something. And so that's when

I -- I had the brochure. So I just gave him

the brochure and, you know, just told him to

pick one out and I would exchange it.

Q. Mr. Ray, when you were in the --

the times you were in New Orleans, did you

ever go to where Raul lived?

A. No, I never did. I don't know

where he lived. I did contact him by

telephone.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1956

Q. Okay. Now, he gave you $700?

A. I think somewhere around $700,

yes. I think that -- I don't -- I think the

$700 wasn't just to purchase the gun. It was

for other things, but he didn't specify what

other things.

Q. Had you already purchased the

camera equipment then?

A. Yes, I had the camera equipment.

Q. Where did you purchase that?

A. I purchased all of it in

Birmingham except for one item, and I

couldn't get -- there was one item I couldn't

get. I think they ordered it from Chicago,

but I had to leave Birmingham before it

arrived.

Q. Okay. You left New Orleans and

had gone to Birmingham and then on to

Atlanta. How many times had you been in

Birmingham before this time?

A. Well, just the one time when I

was there in September -- no -- yes,

September, in the latter part of August, '67.

Q. Okay. And how many times had

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1957

you been in Atlanta before this time?

A. That's the only time I had ever

been there.

Q. And you hail never been in

Memphis other than just coming through maybe

up until --

A. Right. As I mentioned -- I

think I mentioned yesterday in 1955 I went

with my uncle to Florida, and he may have

went through some of those towns, but I don't

have any recollection of which towns he went

through.

Q. Okay. Mr. Ray, let me ask you

something. As you know, there was a map

found in Atlanta after the assassination.

You know that, don't you?

A. Yes.

Q. It had some circles on it,

didn't it?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you ever make a map of New

Orleans where you circled anything?

A. I circled some maps and made

marks on some maps, but I don't know just

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1958

which ones they were. I think Attorney

Pepper, he has some of the maps.

Q. What about a map of Birmingham,

did you ever make a map there and circle any

locations?

A. I really don't -- I really can't

recall.

Q. What about Memphis, did you ever

make one of it and circle any locations?

A. I didn't -- I don't think I had

a map of Memphis.

Q. Okay. You took the gun back to

Raul, and he said he wasn't satisfied with

it, and you called the Aeromarine Supply back

and told them you wanted to exchange it?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you go back over the same

day?

A. Yes. I took the rifle -- I took

the rifle back the same day, yes.

Q. Okay. And they told you to come

back and get another -- the next day when you

picked it up?

A. Yes, sometime the next morning.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1959

Q. Where did you stay that night in

Birmingham?

A. I stayed at the Five Points.

Q. Did Raul stay there with you?

A. No, he didn't.

Q. Do you know where he stayed?

A. No. I think I took him down to

the -- to the post office. That was right

across the street from the Starlight, and I

don't know where he went.

Q. What time did you take him to

the post office?

A. That would be on Friday. Well,

it was after I came back from there. I

imagine it would be about three or four

o'clock.

Q. Then how did you know to meet

him the next day? Where did you know --

A. Where did I know where to --

Q. To meet Raul the next day. You

were going to meet him the next day or --

A. No, no. He give -- he give me

an address in Memphis, the New Rebel Motel.

Q. So you weren't going to meet him

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1960

anymore?

A. No, that was it. He said he was

going somewhere else.

Q. Now, we're at the point where

you haven't picked the gun up yet. Now, did

he see the gun anymore after -- I'm talking

about the second gun -- did he see it anymore

before you arrived in Memphis?

A. No.

Q. He never saw it anymore?

A. No, not after that.

Q. All right. Now, we're talking

about March the 28th or 29th. How long did

you stay in Birmingham before you left?

A. Well, I left there sometime the

next day after I got the rifle, which would

have either been the 29th or 30th.

Q. Of March?

A. Yes.

Q. And you left Birmingham and

drove toward Memphis?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Where did you stop at?

Where is the first stop you made after you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1961

left Birmingham?

A. I'm almost certain it was

Decatur.

Q. Stayed there one night?

A. Yes.

Q. When did he tell you to meet him

in Memphis?

A. That was on April 3rd.

Q. Okay. And then after -- you

stayed in Decatur one night, and where did

you stay there?

A. I don't know the name of the

motel.

Q. What was the next place you

stayed?

A. The next place I stayed would

have been the -- there is two towns up there.

One of them is Tuscumbia, and I don't --

Q. Florence and Muscle Shoals,

they're all three together there.

A. Well, Tuscumbia is right across

the -- right across the way from another

town. It's not Muscle Shoals. It's --

Q. It's not Florence --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1962

A. Tuscumbia is on the right-hand

side, and the other town is on the left-hand

side. I stayed in the town on the left-hand

side.

Q. Okay.

A. I don't know --

Q. Okay. You stayed there one

night?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. You were driving the

Mustang?

A. Yes.

Q. And had the -- where was the gun

in the car? Was it in the trunk or up in the

seat, back seat or where?

A. No. It was in the trunk.

Q. Did you have any other gun?

A. I had another gun, but I didn't

have it with me.

Q. What kind of other gun did you

have?

A. Well, I had the .38 that I had

purchased in Birmingham, but I left it in the

rooming house. I had it buried downstairs.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1963

Q. Okay. When did you purchase it

in Birmingham?

A. The .38?

Q. The .38.

A. Well, sometimes -- when I

arrived there in August, the latter part of

August, I must have purchased it sometime in

September.

Q. And how did you do that?

A. I -- there was a want ad,

classifieds, from a private party.

Q. Okay. How much did you pay for

it?

A. I believe it was $75.

Q. Okay. You left then. Where was

the next stop you made after the stop in --

somewhere near Tuscumbia, Alabama?

A. I went to Corinth, Mississippi.

Q. And where did you stay there,

Mr. Ray?

A. I thought it was the Southern

Motel, but we have never been able to

establish it one way or another. Most of

these records have been -- some records have

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1964

been destroyed after we started checking on

them, the hotel registration cards.

Q. What day did Raul tell you to

meet him in Memphis at the Rebel --

A. It was on April 3rd.

Q. What time?

A. Well, he didn't give me a

specific time. He just told me to check in

there, and he would -- you know, he would

meet me there.

Q. And what name did he tell you to

check in under?

A. Well, I assumed -- he didn't

tell me any name. I assumed it would be Eric

Galt because I never checked in a motel

under, you know, a different name because the

police usually check your license plates at

the motels.

Q. Now, the car you were driving

was registered to Eric Galt, and you had an

Alabama driver's license?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. You left Corinth,

Mississippi what date?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1965

A. Well, that would have been April

the 2nd.

Q. And drove on where from there?

A. I drove on to Memphis.

Q. Okay. How did you find the New

Rebel Motel?

A. Well, I didn't find it at that

time. I -- on April 2nd I checked into the

Desoto Motel, which is right across the line

from a -- from the -- from Memphis.

Q. Okay. And you spent the night

of April the 2nd there?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Why did you go there?

A. Well, it wasn't April 3rd yet.

I was going to the New Rebel April 3rd.

Q. But why did you choose this one

in Mississippi?

A. Well, there is no specific

reason. I didn't want to stay downtown, and

so I just --

Q. But the New Rebel wasn't

downtown?

A. Well, it wasn't, but at that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1966

time I don't believe I knew where it was. I

think I found out the address the next day.

Q. Okay. Did you have any kind of

a map where you were using to get your

directions since you had never been in

Memphis?

A. I probably had a map of

Mississippi and Alabama, but I don't know. I

had so many maps. I had 20 or 30. I don't

recall just exactly. There is a list of all

the maps that I had, and the FBI has them,

but I can't recall, you know, maps of foreign

countries and whatever.

Q. Okay. Mr. Ray, when did you

find out Dr. King would be in Memphis?

A. When did I find out?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. Well, I found out, I guess,

about April the -- April 4th. I would say

about 6:30.

Q. You didn't find out on April the

3rd he would be in Memphis or April the 2nd

he was planning to be in Memphis?

A. No, I didn't. I didn't know

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1967

anything about it.

Q. Well, now, you know the FBI

found a Memphis paper where it had a detailed

account of where he was going to be. You

know that, don't you?

A. That I had a Memphis paper?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. Yes. I always buy a paper when

I go into town.

Q. Well, Mr. Ray, I was practicing

law back then right downtown, and there were

headlines every day where he was going to be.

Now, you knew he was going to be there,

didn't you?

A. No, I didn't. There is all

kinds of headlines in newspapers. They don't

particularly interest me, what the headlines

are.

Q. You didn't read the headlines --

it was all on the news, on the tv, all in the

headlines because I saw it every day and was

part of all this, and it was headlines --

everybody knew he was going to be there, all

the trouble they had. Now, you knew about

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1968

that, didn't you?

A. No, I had no idea about it. I

mean I probably knew about it if I read the

paper, but it didn't stick in my mind. If

the President would have been there, it

wouldn't have any -- you know, I wouldn't

have been interested in it.

Q. But you didn't know about all

the riots they were having down in downtown

that they had had a day or two before, and it

was kind of dangerous to be downtown and

everybody knew that? You didn't know about

that?

A. No. I just come into town.

Q. Well, it was all in the

newspapers. It was all on the news.

Everybody knew about it, on the national

news.

A. Everyone knew. I don't think

everyone knew about it. There is 250 million

people in the country. I doubt if --

Q. I doubt if there was very many

if they watched the news that didn't know

about it. And you're telling us you didn't

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1969

know about that?

A. No, I didn't. I may have knew

about it, but it didn't stick -- you know, it

didn't hang up in my memory or anything.

Q. Okay. Did you ever stay in the

Pontotoc Hotel?

A. Pontotoc in Memphis? No.

Q. You never did?

A. No.

Q. Okay. You left Alabama, arrived

at the Desoto Motel down in -- just across

the state line and stayed there one night?

A. Yes.

Q. What time did you get there?

A. It would have been sometime in

the afternoon because I was driving real slow

from Birmingham to Memphis. And I had

estimated it was sometime in the afternoon.

I didn't even -- I didn't even go into

Memphis proper that day. I just stayed on

the edge of town, and --

Q. Okay. Well, let me ask you

something. If you were in Corinth,

Mississippi -- there's a highway called

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1970

Highway 72. It's the only highway leading

toward Memphis, the main highway.

A. Yes.

Q. Did you take that?

A. That's apparently the one I

took, yes.

Q. Where did you get off of that to

go to Mississippi because you had to make a

detour off of that somewhere?

A. Well, I'm not familiar with

Memphis at that time. I'm still not, but I

just -- there was no reason for me to go

downtown.

Q. Did you drive into Tennessee?

A. Yes. I was in Memphis, yes.

Q. You actually drove into Memphis

before you went to the Desoto Motel?

A. Yes, the outskirts, yes.

Q. All right. You had gone on then

to the Desoto Motel, and what time did you

check out of there?

A. Well, whatever the time --

usually I stayed until they -- you have to

leave. It probably would have been twelve or

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1971

one o'clock whenever they --

Q. Okay. And then you proceeded

from there to the New Rebel Motel?

A. Yes.

Q. Out on Lamar?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Then how long were you

there before Raul appeared?

A. Well, I would say I got there

maybe one or two o'clock, and he appeared

sometime that night. I know it was raining,

and it must have been nine o'clock.

Q. You had a room there and had

your car parked close to it?

A. Yes, right in front of it.

Q. He just came and appeared?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. What was the extent of

your conversation with him?

A. Well, he just came in. It had

been raining, and I think he had a raincoat

on, and we started talking. And he asked me

if I had brought the rifle up, and I said,

yes. And I don't remember all the small

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1972

talk. And then subsequently he told me to --

you know, he wanted me to meet him at a Jim's

Grill the next day at I think it was three

o'clock.

Q. Did he tell you where Jim's

Grill was located?

A. Yes. I think he had it wrote

down, the name and the street, but I don't --

Q. You still had the gun in your

possession in the car at that time?

A. No. I had -- the gun was in the

motel.

Q. Okay. Did he look at it?

A. Yes. He took it with him, yes.

Q. He said, this is the gun I want?

He had never seen it up to that point?

A. Well, he knew what it was

because he picked it out of the brochure.

Q. But he had never seen it up to

that point as far as you know up until this

time?

A. No. He had never seen it, not

that one, no.

Q. All right. And did he indicate

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1973

to you why he wanted to take the gun with him

since you had had it in your possession?

A. I assumed he wanted to show it

to someone.

Q. All right. Who did he say he

was going to show it to?

A. He didn't say. I just assumed

that because he was supposed to meet some,

you know, gun dealers.

Q. Okay. And he told you to meet

him at Jim's Grill the next day?

A. Yes.

Q. What time was it that he

appeared roughly?

A. Did I -- what time did I appear

there?

Q. What time did Raul appear at

the New Rebel Motel to see you?

A. Well, I would say it was around

nine o'clock.

Q. At night?

A. It was nighttime, yes.

Q. Okay. How did he get there?

A. I really don't know.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1974

Q. Okay. How long did he stay?

A. I don't think he stayed over 15

minutes at the most.

Q. He just told you to meet him the

next day at Jim's Grill?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. And when he left,

how did he leave?

A. I really don't know. I didn't

pay no attention after he left. It was

raining, so I really wasn't interested in

knowing how he left.

Q. Mr. Ray, did you not find it

strange after all these months that this man

would just simply appear out of nowhere and

then vanish into nowhere? You never did see

him come up with anybody. You never saw

where he stayed all these months.

A. Well, I assume when someone is

involved in criminal activities, they don't,

you know, tell their associates everything

they're doing. I never saw him with anyone

except the individual in Nuevo Laredo,

Mexico, and I just never made any inquiries.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1975

I have had, you know, experience

with criminals, and usually if they're paying

you, you don't make any inquiries. I know if

I was paying someone, I wouldn't, you know,

be telling him all my personal business.

Q. All right. Then you stayed in

the New Rebel Motel that night, and left then

the next day at what time?

A. Well, whenever I checked out. I

think -- I would say it was about twelve or

one o'clock. I'm just estimating that.

Q. And where did you go then?

A. Well, I just drove around. I

just stalled around more or less until 3:00

o'clock or 3:30, and I don't know exactly

where I drove at. I know I was driving

around the edge of town. I think I went

across the Mississippi line or near the

Mississippi line. And subsequently I had a

flat tire, and I changed tires on the car.

Q. Where did you have a flat tire?

A. It was along the edge of

Memphis. It was -- it wasn't, you know,

downtown. I think it was -- it could have

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1976

been across the line of Mississippi, but it

was right on the edge of it. It wasn't no

residential district.

Q. Okay. Did you change the tire?

A. Yes. I just took the wheel off

and put another one on, yes.

Q. All right. Then where did you

go?

A. From there I intended to have a

meeting with Raul at the Jim's Grill. So I

drove to a commercial parking lot, which is

-- it's not downtown. I would say it's

about 10 or 12 blocks from downtown because I

could see the Memphis skyline. And I checked

in there, and I think I asked the attendant

something about Main Street or something, and

anyway -- I can't recall just exactly. So I

left and started walking toward downtown

Memphis.

Q. How did you know it was towards

downtown since you had never been there?

A. Well, I could see the tall

buildings in the general area down there, so

I assumed that was --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1977

Q. Okay. There are several streets

downtown with tall buildings. How did you

know which street to get on?

A. How did I know? I don't -- I

didn't particularly know. I just walked down

toward the -- is what you call the

residential -- the high rise --

Q. Okay.

A. I may have asked the attendant.

I don't know. I probably asked him something

about it.

Q. What was the weather like that

day?

A. It seemed to be all right. I

don't know whether --

Q. Was it raining or sun shining?

A. No, I don't believe it was

raining. I think the sun was shining as far

as I know.

Q. Okay. All right. Did you then

eventually arrive at Jim's Grill?

A. No, I didn't know where it was

at. I think I got -- when I got downtown, I

asked a policeman for directions about -- I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1978

think I asked him where South Main Street

was. I don't think I asked him where Jim's

Grill was. And he give me directions, and

then -- anyway, when I got on Main Street,

then I located Jim's Grill then.

Q. Okay. When you asked the

policeman for directions, how far was that

from Jim's Grill? I mean are we looking at a

block, half a block, ten blocks?

A. No. I think it was a little --

I would just guess it was eight or ten

blocks. I wasn't --

Q. Okay. Were you -- were you on

Main Street then?

A. I don't believe I was. I'm not

positive.

Q. And did you go to Jim's Grill?

A. No. I went -- I got on Main,

and I was going south on Main, and I stopped

at a -- it was a -- some type of a bar that

sold alcohol there, and I asked the lady --

now, this is on the right-hand side of Main

Street going south -- and I asked the barmaid

where Jim's Grill was. Now, I ordered a beer

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1979

while I was in there. And she told me it was

-- it was a couple -- a couple of blocks --

a block and a half or so down the street on

the other side of the street.

And I also -- it's just -- at

this time I also saw -- mentioned I saw the

two individuals that I mentioned yesterday

that I thought perhaps were -- well, you get

kind of -- you know, you're kind of nervous

under those conditions. Anyway, I thought

maybe they were -- they appeared to be

watching me or something.

Q. How were you dressed?

A. I just had a dark suit on.

Q. With a tie?

A. Yes.

Q. White shirt?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you have a coat with you,

overcoat?

A. No.

Q. It wasn't cold enough that day

to have an overcoat?

A. No, I don't believe it was.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1980

Q. Okay. Then where did you go?

Okay. Let me back up. You were

in this place, and you saw two individuals.

Were they the only ones in there -- only

customers in this place?

A. No, they weren't.

Q. There were other customers?

A. Yes.

Q. They were -- and they were

looking at you for some reason, and you were

suspicious of them?

A. Yes.

Q. How long did you stay in there?

A. I imagine four or five minutes

at the most.

Q. Did these individuals leave

before you did or did you leave first?

A. They apparently left before I

did.

Q. Did you watch them the whole

time you were in there?

A. No, I didn't stare at them. I

just got the feeling they was watching me,

and so --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1981

Q. Okay. Then you left, and where

did you go then?

A. I went to Jim's Grill then.

Q. Okay. How far was Jim's Grill

from this location where you were?

A. I don't think it was over a

block and a half or two blocks. I couldn't

be more specific than that. It was on the

other side of the street.

Q. Okay. How did you recognize

Jim's Grill?

A. I think there was a sign there

or something, you know.

Q. Where was it?

A. Where was the sign?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. I don't have no idea now at this

time.

Q. Was there any lettering on the

windows or on the door that you recall

saying, Jim's Grill?

A. No, I can't recall that at all.

There was something on there.

Q. So you entered Jim's Grill off

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1982

of Main Street?

A. Yes.

Q. And did you have anything with

you in your hands? Were you carrying

anything, briefcase or anything?

A. No, I wasn't carrying anything,

no.

Q. You walked into Jim's Grill, and

what did you see in there?

A. Well, these two individuals were

in there, and Raul wasn't in there, so I

just -- I think I ordered a beer in there.

I'm not 100 percent certain, but I may have.

Q. Can you tell us something about

Jim's Grill, what you remember seeing about

it when you first entered? Was it a place

where there was just a bar or were there

tables or tell us what you remember.

A. Well, my recollection was --

and, of course, I found out subsequently my

recollection is wrong -- it was on -- on the

left-hand side there was a bar, and on the

right-hand side there was sort of booths.

And subsequently I learned it was just the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1983

opposite. The bar was on the right-hand

side, and the booths was on the left-hand

side. I think the -- the back part of the

bar seemed to be a -- it might have been

lower than the front part.

Q. Lower?

A. Yes, I believe it was. I think

they might have served food back there.

That's what my recollection is.

Q. Were you seated?

A. Pardon?

Q. Were you seated at any time?

A. No, I was up in the front.

Q. At the bar?

A. Yes.

Q. Who waited on you?

A. Well, some young lady. She was

black or white. I can't recall just --

Q. About what time did you arrive

at the bar roughly, Mr. -- I mean Jim's Grill

roughly, Mr. Ray? Are we looking at two

o'clock, three o'clock, four o'clock, what?

A. No. It was sometime after

three. I don't think it was a whole lot

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1984

after three.

Q. How many customers did they have

in there?

A. There didn't appear to be many

in there at all from what I could see.

Q. You saw these other two

individuals you had seen earlier in there.

Where were they seated, up at the bar or were

they at a table?

A. No. They were down further from

where I was, and there was -- I think there

was a bar. They just glanced up.

Q. These two individuals, were they

black or white?

A. They were white.

Q. Okay. And did they have any

rings in their ear or anything like that?

A. I don't recall what -- I don't

recall anything about one of them. The one I

do recall appeared to be -- looked to me --

seemed to be out of place. He had a coat on.

He was about five foot eight or nine, and

he looked like he weighed about a hundred and

-- kind of a fairly strong build -- a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1985

hundred and seventy pounds or something like

that.

Q. And did he have long hair, short

hair?

A. No. I think he just looked

normal.

Q. Okay. When you went into Jim's

Grill, did they seem to be looking at you

some more?

A. Yes. I think he did -- I think

I seen them, and they just glanced up. And I

was just in there a few minutes and that was

--

Q. Did you leave?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Where did you go from

there?

A. Well, I intended then to go down

and pick up the Mustang at the commercial

parking lot and park in the general area of

Jim's Grill.

Q. Now, the Mustang is, what, seven

or eight blocks away, something like that?

A. Yes. It was at least seven or

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1986

eight blocks away.

Q. Okay.

A. It could have been a little bit

farther.

Q. You stayed in Jim's Grill about

15 minutes?

A. No, I wasn't there -- I believe

it was two or three minutes.

Q. I thought you said you ordered a

beer.

A. I did. I probably just left it

sitting there.

Q. All right. Did you order

anything else besides a beer?

A. No, I didn't.

Q. And these individuals were there

when you left?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. You walked out, and

when you walked out on Main Street, did you

go north or south to go get your Mustang?

A. I think I -- I think I went

north, the same way I came in.

Q. Okay. Did you go back and get

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1987

the Mustang?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. And where did you park it

when you came back?

A. I parked it, I would estimate,

about 15 or 20 feet from Jim's Grill,

probably in front of the front door. I know

I didn't park right in front of the -- right

in front of the place.

Q. Now, was it facing north or

south on Main?

A. It was facing north.

Q. And after you parked the car

what did you do then?

A. Well, I went back in Jim's

Grill.

Q. Okay. And who did you see in

there then?

A. Well, Raul was in there at that

--

Q. He was in there?

A. Yes, he was in there.

Q. Where was he?

A. Well, he was up at the bar

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1988

section.

Q. In the bar?

A. Yes.

Q. Sitting at the bar?

A. Yes.

Q. What was he -- how was he

dressed? Do you remember how he was dressed?

A. Well, he had a dark suit on. I

don't know if it was a suit, but -- and he

had a shirt on, and he didn't have no tie on,

and that's about it.

Q. Okay. When you entered Jim's

Grill, did you, again, go up to the bar and

have a seat?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you order anything?

A. I may have ordered a beer. I'm

not 100 percent certain.

Q. Who waited on you that time?

A. Well, it would have been the --

well, it would have been the young waitress,

but it's my recollection that when I went in

one time, she was white, and when I went in

the next time, she was black. But I don't

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1989

know which sequence --

Q. Did you ever see any male

employees of that grill either time you were

in there, anyone?

A. No, I really wasn't in there

very -- long enough to pay much -- I usually

don't pay too much attention to people when I

go into bars anyway, I mean unless there is

some reason to pay attention to them. So I

wouldn't have --

Q. I thought you told me earlier

you had been to some place -- an ice cream

place, and you noticed that the girl didn't

seem to know how to operate the cash

register.

A. Yes.

Q. So you did notice sometimes --

A. Well, I was interested in the

cash register because I was -- well, I just

-- you know, when you are robbing --

Q. But you don't recall seeing if

there was men or women in the grill this

time?

A. No. I don't recall how many was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1990

in there or anything of that nature. I

wasn't -- I was just interested in him, and

that was it. I was interested in getting in

and getting out.

Q. All right. What did he tell you

when you entered the grill?

A. Well, I can't recall all the

conversation, but he seemed to be interested

in the Mustang, and subsequently --

Q. What did he tell you that made

you think he was interested in the Mustang?

A. He asked me if I had it, and so

I said, yes. And when we went out the door,

I said, you know, there it is. It's parked

there.

Q. Had he ever driven the Mustang

before?

A. Had he?

Q. Yes, sir. Up to this point had

he ever driven it any time since you had had

it?

A. If he had, I hadn't -- I didn't

know about it.

Q. Okay. I mean, what was his

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1991

interest in the Mustang? Why was he

interested in that as far as you could tell?

A. Well, he wanted to know if I had

it, you know, if I had brought it with me.

Q. Well, I mean wouldn't he have

known that because you had been driving it?

How did he think you would have gotten there

without the Mustang? I mean didn't he buy

the Mustang or give you the money to buy it

so you could drive it?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. Did you not find it

strange that he asked you -- inquired about

the Mustang all of a sudden as to where it

was and whether or not you had it?

A. Well, I didn't -- I didn't

consider it strange since he paid for it. Of

course, I had some equity in it because I

sold the Plymouth. I considered I had equity

in it, but it's not strange to me at all if

he wanted to possibly use it or something.

Q. All right. But he had never

driven it before that as far as you know?

A. He had never been in it?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1992

Q. He had never driven it before

that?

A. He had a set of keys, but if he

did, I didn't know about it.

Q. Okay. Other than asking you

about the Mustang, what else did he ask you

or mention to you?

A. Well, he wanted me to rent a

room upstairs at the rooming house over Jim's

Grill.

Q. Did you notice there was a

rooming house up there when you drove up to

Jim's Grill in the Mustang or when you came

there the first time?

A. I don't believe I did. No, I

don't think so.

Q. Okay. Mr. Ray, let me ask you

something. Why had you checked out of the

New Rebel Motel? What was the reason for

checking out there when you checked out?

A. You mean the next day at twelve

o'clock?

Q. The day you checked out, yes,

sir.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1993

A. Well, I was going to have a

meeting with Raul, and I had until three

o'clock, and I had to get out of there a

certain time, so I checked out.

Q. But how did you know where you

were going to stay that night?

A. Well, I really didn't know where

I was going to stay, but, you know, it was no

problem finding some place to stay.

Q. Did he tell you to check out of

the motel or was that just your idea?

A. Well, no, he didn't tell me to

check out, but he told me to meet him there.

And as I mentioned, I had to check out by a

certain hour.

Q. Did you think you would be

leaving Memphis that day?

A. I had no idea at that time.

Q. You had all your belongings with

-- what did I leave there?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. I didn't leave anything there.

I took -- yes, I took all of my -- I thought

you was talking about my belongings from

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1994

Atlanta.

Q. I'm talking about all the things

you brought to Memphis with you.

A. No. Everything -- when I left

the New Rebel, took everything out of it I

had and, you know, put them in the car.

Q. All right. Now, he told you to

rent a room up in the rooming house over

Jim's Grill?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Did he give you some

money?

A. No, he didn't.

Q. All right. Did you proceed to

do that?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. Okay. How did you know where to

go to the stairway to go to this rooming

house? Did he show you?

A. I don't know -- I don't think he

showed me. I think -- or he might have

pointed it out, but there is -- I know I was

right close by the stairway that led up

there, and he just -- he was the one that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1995

suggested I go up there. So he might have

pointed it out or something. He might have

been --

Q. Did he go up there with you?

A. Not at that time, no, I went up

alone.

Q. All right. Well, was he still

in Jim's Grill when you left?

A. I really don't know where he

went. After I left -- when I went up to the

rooming house and rented the room, he may

have went back to the grill or he may have

sat in the car. I don't know where he was.

Q. My question is, when you left

Jim's Grill, did he leave with you or had he

already left?

A. Yes. He -- we went out the door

at the same time.

Q. Which direction did he go on

Main Street when you went out?

A. Well, we both turned left and,

you know, walked over toward the car.

Q. Was the car parked north or

south of the front door of Jim's Grill?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1996

A. The car would have been south of

Jim's Grill, not too far south.

Q. And when you walked out of the

Jim's Grill to go up to the stairs, did you

go north or south on Main Street?

A. Well, when I came out, I went

south, and as I mentioned, toward the

Mustang.

Q. Okay.

A. And then when I went to the -- I

went upstairs to the rooming house, I'm not

certain just what location -- whether I went

three or four steps north or three or four

steps south, but it's right in that general

area.

Q. Okay. Did you have to enter

through a door to go to the stairs to go up

to the rooming house?

A. Yes, there was a door there.

Q. Okay. And you left the street

and went through the door up to the top of

the stairs, right?

A. It's my recollection that, yes,

I went to the stairs, and then I -- I think I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1997

turned right and went down a slight incline,

and I went up some more stairs, and the

office is there.

Q. And where was Raul during this

time?

A. Well, he was either in Jim's

Grill or in the car, just standing down there

somewhere.

Q. Okay.

A. I have no idea specifically

where he was at.

Q. And you reached the top of the

stairs at the location there, and what did

you -- who did you see or who did you talk

to?

A. Well, I talked to some lady

there. She was apparently the landlady, and

I just inquired -- made inquiry about a room,

and she told me she had two. She showed me

two rooms. One was a sleeping room, and one

was a room I think they cook in. And I told

her I just wanted a sleeping room. So she

said okay. She showed me -- but she showed

me both of them, and then when we got back to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1998

the office, I think I gave her 10 or $20, and

she gave me some change.

Q. Okay. What name did you use?

A. At that point -- I think I used

the name John Willard at that place.

Q. Had you ever used that alias

before?

A. I don't know. I possibly had

heard it before or something. I have some

recollection of hearing the name before, but

I'm not, certain. I probably did.

Q. Mr. Ray, what I find strange is

you used Eric Galt two nights before this,

and all of a sudden on the night Dr. King was

assassinated you use another alias. What was

the reason for that?

A. When I go in a motel, I always

use my -- the car I'm registered under

because the police check on these -- on these

-- you know, they drive by and check your

license plates and see if it matches up with

your room.

Anyway, whenever I go in a hotel

or a rooming house, I always use an alias

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

1999

because, you know, the police don't --

they're not checking license plates.

Q. But you didn't use an alias down

in Birmingham when you stayed there?

A. Well, I was going to stay there

quite a while. I had my car parked down

there, and I was trying to get

identification.

Q. How long -- how did you know how

long you were going to be in this rooming

house in Memphis?

A. I didn't know. Raul, when he

met me up in the room, he said we might be

there two or three days, and he suggested I

bring my clothing up. But I had no idea how

long I was going to be there, but I didn't

think it would be over a couple of days.

Q. Had you ever known anyone by the

name of John Willard?

A. I may have heard that name

somewhere. Usually when I use an alias -- if

I have heard of someone or something,

sometimes I'll use the name. But I can't

recall just where the name originated from.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2000

Q. And also in Atlanta you were

there under the name of Eric Galt too,

weren't you?

A. Yes.

Q. And you weren't in a motel there

where the police were checking your license,

were you?

A. No, no, I wasn't. I was

receiving criminal correspondence there too.

Q. The Mustang was still parked

downstairs some 15 or 20 feet away from the

front of the grill door, right?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. About what time was

it that you went upstairs to get the room?

A. It's really difficult to

estimate that. I would say -- I know I was

late when I got there. It could have been

four o'clock or fifteen after four. It was

somewhere -- it was after 3:30 because I was

supposed to have been up there, I think, at

3:30. And then I had -- I think I was on

time the first time, and then how long it

took me to walk down there and pick up the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2001

Mustang and drive back, that's probably how

late it was. I would guess it was somewhere

-- four -- maybe after four o'clock.

Q. You said you were supposed to

get there at 3:30?

A. I believe it was about 3:30. He

give me a -- 3:00 or 3:30. He gave me a time

to be up there.

Q. Had you driven very far south on

Main Street past Jim's Grill before parking

the Mustang, say a block or two?

A. Had I driven south?

Q. Yes, sir. You said you were

facing north, so you must have driven south

and turned around and parked on -- you're

saying you were parked on the same side as

Jim's Grill, weren't you?

A. Yes, but I think I believe I

came in on the south side. I may have -- I

may have come down on the north side and

turned around and come back and parked on the

-- the front of Jim's Grill or I may have

come in from the south side. But I don't --

I don't have no clear recollection of that at

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2002

all, but it seems to me like I came in from

the south.

Q. Do you remember passing a fire

station just a -- almost within sight of

Jim's Grill, just a short distance away?

A. I know the fire station you're

talking about, but I don't recall passing it,

no.

Q. Okay. How long did you stay in

the room after you rented the room? After

you paid her for the room, how long did you

stay there before you left?

A. Well, I hadn't been up there

over three or four minutes, and then Raul

came up there. He --

Q. Now, you said -- I'm sorry. Go

ahead. I didn't mean to cut you off.

A. No. He entered the room. He

came up there.

Q. You said she showed you a

sleeping room and a cooking room, right?

A. Yes.

Q. And were they on the same side

of the building? Was one on the north side

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2003

and one on the south side -- I'm sorry --

east and west side?

A. I don't know just where they was

at, but they weren't close together. One of

them was on, I think, one side of the

building, and one side was the other.

Q. They weren't side by side?

A. No, they weren't.

Q. You had to walk in one direction

to go to one and one direction to the other,

right?

A. Yes, they were --

Q. All right. This room that you

paid her for, can you describe it for me,

what you -- what it looked like? What did it

have in it?

A. Well, there was a bed in it and

a dresser, and I think there was a chair, and

that's about all I recall.

Q. Okay. You didn't have any of

your personal belongings such as any clothing

or anything with you then?

A. Not at that time. Raul, he --

later he suggested I bring my clothing up

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2004

there, but when I first went up, no, I didn't

have anything.

Q. Okay. It was in your car?

A. Yes.

Q. Did it have a window?

A. Yes. I think there were a

couple of windows, yes.

Q. Did you look out the window to

see what the -- which direction they were

facing or what kind of a view you had?

A. I don't have any clear

recollection, but I know I always look out

the back window, you know, in case the police

run in, and I need an exit or something.

Q. You were on a second story

building?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. What did you see in

looking out the window?

A. I don't have no recollection,

but I know I usually always check out, you

know, windows when I check into a place like

that.

Q. Well, let me ask you this: The

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2005

window you were looking out, were you looking

in a generally east direction or west

direction?

A. Well, one of the windows would

have faced -- let's see -- south. If you are

going south, west is on your -- let me see.

Here is north and south.

For the record, I'm putting this

on a piece of paper trying to get it

straightened out.

When you are on the south --

well, it would have been facing east.

Q. Could you see the Lorraine

Motel?

A. I didn't have no recollection of

seeing it. You can see it from -- I have

seen -- I have subsequently seen diagrams of

the place. It would have been easy to see.

Q. Did you see any vegetation, such

as trees, immediately behind the place where

you were staying?

A. I don't have no recollection. I

was just looking at it for a quick exit. I

wasn't interested in, you know, any

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2006

particular trees or whatever.

Q. Okay. Raul came on up and came

in your room and told you what?

A. Well, we just had a brief

conversation, and he said we might be a

couple of days or three, and he suggested I

bring my clothing up. And then I didn't want

to do that because of the type place it was.

It was a wino place, and they come in and

carry off your things of that nature. But

subsequently I did bring some articles up

there.

Q. What did you bring up there?

A. I brought a case up there,

overnight case, and some shaving --

Q. Talking about a piece of luggage

or a suitcase or something like that?

A. Yes. It was kind of a small, I

would say -- well, just a small -- about the

size of a large attache case.

Q. All right. Now, that was the

first time Raul had been up there after you

had checked -- after you had paid for the

room, right?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2007

A. Well, I don't know if he had

been there before I had or not.

Q. Since you had been --

A. But with me, yes, that was the

first time.

Q. Did he have this rifle with him?

A. I don't know if he did or not.

He didn't have it with him when he came into

the room.

Q. Okay. Did he have anything with

him? Did you see him with any kind of an

attache case or luggage or anything that you

saw?

A. Well, subsequently not -- at

that particular time I noticed he turned his

back on me once, and he raised his arm or

something, and, you know, I think he -- I

thought he had a small transistor radio in

his pocket, but other than that, he didn't

have anything.

Q. All right. Did he have on a

coat or just a shirt and pants?

A. He had on a coat and a shirt and

pants, I think.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2008

Q. Now, you had no idea at that

time what he wanted you to do, am I correct,

I mean why you were there or what he wanted

you to do?

A. Yes. I knew it was something

about displaying guns, and, you know --

Q. What made you think that?

A. Well, he generally referred to

that. He didn't make any specific -- but he

just generally --

Q. Well, what did he say to

generally refer to that? What words did he

use?

A. Well, he was going to meet gun

dealers in Memphis, and, you know, the -- he

was never specific about anything, and --

Q. Who was he going to make a gun

deal in Memphis with?

A. He didn't say anything about --

any names or anything of that nature.

Q. Okay. He came up and told you

he thought you should bring your personal

belongings up to the room, right?

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2009

Q. He said you might be there three

or four days?

A. Yes, two or three days.

Q. Did he stay in the room while

you had gone down and got those things?

A. I don't believe I got them right

then. I think I may have got them like -- I

may have got them then, but I think I got

them the next time. He had me run an errand

at that time, and --

Q. Where did he have you go and run

an errand?

A. Well, that's when he wanted me

to purchase the pair of binoculars with

infrared attachments on them, and he gave me

general directions to a sporting goods store

where I could get them at.

Q. Okay. How much money did you

have on you then, Mr. Ray, roughly?

A. Well, I had --

Q. He had given you $700 to buy

this gun a few days earlier. You spent part

of it for the gun.

A. I don't know. I had 15 or

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2010

$1,600, I guess, altogether.

Q. How can you account for that

because you said you were running low on

money before he gave you this $700.

A. Well, I used to tell him I was

running low on money, but I wasn't -- I don't

think I have testified here I was running low

on money. I don't know what you would

consider low, but --

Q. I'm just using your words. You

said you had asked him for money, and he gave

you $700 when he told you to purchase this --

A. No. I didn't ask him for no

money. He just volunteered that. I asked

him for some money in -- excuse me -- in New

Orleans, but I didn't ask him for any money

when I purchased the rifle.

Q. How did you come up with 16 or

$1,700? Where did you get that money from?

Was that another robbery?

A. No. That's money he gave me,

and I saved it. And I hadn't been robbing --

I hadn't been committing any robberies at

that time.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2011

Q. Well, Mr. Ray, I'm having

trouble with some things. You asked him for

the money in New Orleans. You had left there

and had gone to Birmingham, on to Atlanta,

back to Birmingham, then to all these other

stops you had made, and he only gave you

$700. And I'm having trouble understanding

how you had this much money on you.

A. Well, that's the way I have got

it figured out based on what he's given me

altogether, and what I worked for and what I

escaped with. The reason I come up with the

money --

Q. You had escaped months before.

A. Yes. But I'm talking about --

I'm trying to -- you know, all the money I'm

accumulating all the time I was out there,

and I don't recall just how much money. The

way I calculate my money is how much I was

arrested with and how much I had here and how

much I spent. I don't -- you know, I wasn't

counting my money all the time, but I knew

generally what I had. Of course, the record

supports how much I spent.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2012

Q. But you think you had 15 or

$1,600 when you arrived in Memphis?

A. I believe after he gave me this

-- the $700, think I had 15 or $1,600.

Q. All right. Including that?

A. Well, minus what was used to

purchase the rifle with.

Q. In other words, when he gave you

$700 after you purchased the rifle, you had

15 or 1,600 left; is that correct?

A. Yes, I -- yes, I'm certain of

that.

Q. All right. Of course, you had

used some of the money for motels and food

and gasoline along the way, right?

A. Well, I wouldn't have used too

much on that. I mean after -- I wouldn't use

70 or $80 for the motels and the gasoline.

Q. Okay. All right. He told you

then -- now, he came up to your room, and he

wanted you to run an errand, and what was the

purpose of that?

A. That was to check on the

infrared attachments on the binoculars.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2013

Q. Okay. Were you familiar with

infrared?

A. No. I had heard of them, but I

hadn't -- I wasn't familiar with them at all.

Q. All right. And do you know --

did you know what -- in other words, what

would people use infrared for?

A. I believe they use them to see

in the night.

Q. And did he tell you where to go

get some infrared binoculars?

A. Well, he gave me directions

where I could check on them at this sporting

goods store, which was the binoculars or

whatever it was. He gave me directions down

the street. It was on the right-hand side of

the street going north on Main Street, and I

went in that general direction, and I

couldn't find it. I apparently didn't go

down far enough. So I went back and

explained to him I couldn't locate the place,

and he gave me more specific directions.

Q. Okay. Did you find it?

A. The second time, yes, I found

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2014

it.

Q. Now, what time are we talking

about now roughly? You said you were

supposed to meet him at 3:30 and you were

late. So we're looking at, what, 4:30 or

5:00 o'clock in the afternoon on --

A. Yes. I would say a quarter --

maybe a quarter til five or somewhere like

that, yes.

Q. On April 4, 1968?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. And you wandered down

Main Street to look for this place called,

which we know is York Arms, right?

A. Yes, that's it.

Q. And you didn't find it the first

time. You went -- did you go as much as two

or three blocks?

A. I think I had probably went

three or four blocks. I may have walked past

it, but I'm inclined to think I didn't go far

enough.

Q. Had he told you how much money

to spend for them?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2015

A. No, he didn't mention that.

Q. Okay. Then you couldn't find

it. You then went back to the rooming house?

A. Yes.

Q. And then he gave you more

directions, and then you went back again?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. And, then you did go back

to York Arms and find some binoculars; am I

correct?

A. Yes.

Q. And were they infrared?

A. No. The salesman told me I

would have to check with the Army Surplus to

get those.

Q. Okay. Did he tell you where

there was an Army Surplus located?

A. No, he didn't.

Q. There was one within a block or

two of there, wasn't it?

A. He didn't --

Q. He didn't tell you that?

A. No, he didn't.

Q. All right. You bought some

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2016

binoculars, and were they in a case or

describe them for me.

A. Well, I can't describe them. I

think he just put them in a box, and they

weren't --

Q. Did he show them to you or did

you look through them and try to adjust them?

A. I think he handed them to me and

asked me if these were all right, and I

handed them back and said, Okay, and --

Q. Then you did what then?

A. Well, I just purchased them, and

I asked him some other question, but I can't

recall just exactly what that was.

Q. Do you know what you paid for

them?

A. It wasn't very much.

Q. Ten dollars, fifteen, forty,

fifty?

A. No. It was more than that. It

was $30, I would just guess, 30 or 35.

Q. Where did you go then?

A. I went back to the rooming

house, and Raul, he was still up there. And

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2017

I just told him that I couldn't get the

infrared attachment, and he would have to get

them at an Army facility. And I just threw

the binoculars down on the bed, and that was

it. And then we had a brief conversation. I

hadn't eaten since about, I guess, twelve or

one o'clock. So I --

Q. Now, we're looking at 5:00 p.m.

Or something like that now or 5:15 roughly,

aren't we?

A. Yes. We're coming in there,

yes.

Q. Okay. When you got back to the

room, Mr. Ray, what was Raul doing? Was he

drinking anything, eating anything, watching

-- just what was he doing that you recall?

A. He was just sitting or standing

around. I don't recall specifically what he

was doing. He wasn't doing anything unusual.

Q. Okay. You still hadn't seen any

rifle at that point?

A. No, I hadn't.

Q. Did he have a room up there or

do you know?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2018

A. I really don't know. I assumed

that -- well, I assumed he did, but I don't

know that for certain.

Q. All right. And how long did you

stay in the room when you went back out

there?

A. Not too long. I mentioned the

fact that, you know, I hadn't eaten since

twelve o'clock or somewhere around there.

Q. Okay. Now, we're looking at

around 5:00, 6:15 or something like that,

5;20, right?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. And how long would you

say you stayed in the room, five minutes,

ten, fifteen, twenty, what --

A. Yes. It wouldn't have been any

longer than five or ten minutes.

Q. Okay. And what did you tell him

you were going to do?

A. I told him I was going to have

some lunch.

Q. Did you do that?

A. Yes. I went to a place called

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2019

the Chickasaw -- it was a drug store, and

they sold sandwiches. I didn't know the name

of this place. The policeman in the Memphis

Jail told me the name of it. I described it

to him, so I assume that's the same one. I

believe he said underneath the hotel on the

corner was the Chickasaw Bar or restaurant or

something.

Q. Now, did you go north or south

on Main Street when you left?

A. North.

Q. Did you walk or drive?

A. I walked.

Q. Was that a block or two, two or

three blocks or what?

A. From Jim's Grill? I don't know

how far this place is. I don't think it's

very far, a couple or three blocks.

Q. Okay. Now, you walked there and

purchased a sandwich?

A. I think I got some ice cream.

Q. Okay. Is this where you saw the

young lady who seemed to not know how to

operate the cash register?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2020

A. Yes. I was sitting right up at

the cash register, and the manager come up,

and he was telling her how to operate it.

And I was just generally looking at it to see

if it was -- about the money angle. I was

interested in the money.

Q. Okay. How long did you stay in

there would you say?

A. I don't think I was in there --

maybe 10 minutes at the most.

Q. Okay. And what did you do after

that?

A. Well, I went back to the rooming

house up above Jim's Grill. Sometime during

this point I think sat in the Mustang, but

I'm not certain just when I sat in the

Mustang, whether it was that time or when I

left the next time, when I left the rooming

house the next time. But I know at one time

there I was sitting in the Mustang briefly,

and I was just sitting there thinking.

Q. Okay. Well, was -- did you go

back up to the room then?

A. Yes, I did.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2021

Q. And who was there?

A. Raul.

Q. And what did he tell you then?

A. Well, we just had another brief

conversation. He said he was going to meet

some dealers there that evening or night.

Q. There where?

A. Pardon?

Q. Where did he say he was going to

meet them?

A. He was going to meet them there

in the room.

Q. In the room you were in?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. And then what?

A. Well, he asked me if I would,

you know, go somewhere else until the meeting

was over, and then a couple or three hours

and go to a movie and wherever. And he asked

me to leave the car out front, you know,

leave the car there. So I left -- I left

there about --

Q. Now, what time are we talking

about now? We're down to about 5:20 when you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2022

-- 5:15 or 5:20 when you went to get the ice

cream. You had ten more minutes or so, which

would have made it around 5:30. Then you

walked back. Are we looking at, what, 5:30

or a quarter of 6:00?

A. It was somewhere around -- yes,

5:40 or a quarter til 6:00, somewhere around

that time.

Q. All right. You walked back up

to the room, and he told you he was going to

meet some people there for what purpose?

A. Well, he referred to the gun

transactions.

Q. But you hadn't seen the gun, had

you?

A. No, I hadn't seen it.

Q. You didn't, have it in your

possession?

A. No. I didn't look under the bed

or in the closet or anything. It could have

been in the other room, but I didn't see it.

The last I saw it was the New Rebel Motel.

Q. Okay. And what did he tell you

to do then?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2023

A. Well, he just asked me to go to

a movie or something and come back, you know,

in a couple of hours, and he wanted -- three

hours -- and he wanted to -- he was going to

have a meeting with these individuals.

Q. All right. Did you leave the

room?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. And which way aid you go on Main

Street that time?

A. I crossed the street. Now, at

that time I may have sat in the Mustang for

five or ten minutes. I don't know, but as I

mentioned in previous testimony, at one time

I know I sat in the Mustang for a brief

period of time. I don't think it was ten

minutes.

Anyway, when I left there, when

I went to -- went to a -- regardless of

whether I sat in the Mustang, I went across

the street, and I went -- I walked about a

couple of blocks, I guess, and I went into a

-- I think it was a bar. And I think they

had chairs in there where you -- where you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2024

could sit down, tables and chairs.

Q. Uh-huh. Did you stay in there?

A. Yes. I stayed in there. I was

just sitting there thinking.

Q. Now, we're getting close to 6:00

p.m., very close?

A. We're fairly close to it, I

guess, yes.

Q. And you had -- it was a block or

two away?

A. I would say a couple of blocks,

yes.

Q. Okay. How long would you

estimate you stayed there, Mr. Ray?

A. Not really too long, maybe -- I

think I may have ordered a beer. I may have

ordered a sandwich and not ate it. I don't

know just what -- I was thinking about, you

know, what to do for two or three hours. And

at that time I recalled I had a flat tire

earlier in the morning.

Q. When you left this place, where

did you go then?

A. Well, I went back. I was going

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2025

back to pick up the Mustang and get the tire

fixed and park back, you know, at the same

location that I was at.

Q. Okay. Well, did you go back and

get the Mustang?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. Okay. Was it ever parked back

in front of Jim's Grill anymore?

A. Did I ever park it back in front

of Jim's Grill? No, no. I left Memphis.

Q. Well, let me ask you something.

How can you account for the fact that the

Mustang was parked right in front of Jim's

Grill, in front of the door, and there was

two cars parked bumper to bumper, one in

front and one in back? How can you account

for that? We have several witnesses that

said they saw it.

A. I believe you have different

witnesses testifying to different things.

Q. No, sir, I don't. Several

witnesses told this same thing, many of them.

They all saw it sitting right in front of

the door. Mr. Jowers drove up and parked

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2026

right behind your car --

A. Not my Mustang.

Q. -- bumper to bumper. You were

in his parking place there.

A. Well, that's his testimony. Of

course, I have testified differently.

Q. Many others too.

A. Yes.

Q. Was it ever in front of the door

of the grill -- directly in front of the door

where there was another one parked behind it

and directly in front of it?

A. I don't believe it was ever in

front of the directly in front of the door,

no. This is my recollection. No, I didn't

you know, I didn't -- when I parked there, I

didn't have no intention of trying to

remember subsequently just where I parked at,

but I know it was very close to the grill.

Q. Okay. Okay. You walked back to

the Mustang. It was some 10 to 15 feet south

of the grill -- the front door of the grill,

is that your testimony, where you parked it

earlier?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2027

A. Yes, I believe it was.

Q. All right. Any cars parked in

front of it or behind it then that you

remember where you had trouble getting out?

A. I don't recall having had any

problem getting out.

Q. Okay. And when you left, you

traveled, what, north on Main Street?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. And how far did you go

before you turned off of Main Street?

A. I can't be certain. It could

have been three blocks or it could have been

five or six. But I did go several blocks up

the street, and I turned right, and I think

when I turned right, I went -- I didn't go

very far when I turned right, maybe just one

or two blocks at the most, and turned -- I

made another right turn.

Q. Okay. So you made a right turn

off of Main Street?

A. Yes.

Q. And how far did you go before

you turned again?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2028

A. Not very far. It was either one

or two blocks, but it was not as far as --

Q. Okay. Mr. Ray, just a short

distance would have been a pretty heavy

business district. Had you gotten up in that

area when you turned off?

A. I have no recollection of just

-- I really don't know-- have no strong

recollection of where I turned off right the

first time. I'm just estimating this.

Q. Okay. And what were you looking

for?

A. A service station.

Q. All right. Did you find a

service station?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. Okay. And did you stop there?

A. Yes.

Q. And did you stay there very

long?

A. No. I just asked him if he

could fix the tire, and the attendant said

that, you know, he was busy or it was a busy

time of day or something of that nature.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2029

Q. Okay. And, we're looking at

what time?

A. Well, I guess around six

o'clock. I wasn't checking my watch, but I

based that on the reports.

Q. When you left the room, you had

all of your belongings there, your -- did you

have any clothing with you, any other

clothing with you besides what you had on?

A. Yes. I had it out in the car,

yes.

Q. I thought you said you had taken

it all up to the room?

A. No, I hadn't. I was concerned

about it being stolen. The only thing I took

to the room was an overnight case, I think it

was, and I think I took something to put on

the bed to sleep on.

Q. Okay. Did you take what we call

a bedspread up there with you?

A. Yes. I took -- I may have took

a bedspread or sheet up there. I'm not

certain just what -- I know I took something

up there to cover up the bed with.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2030

Q. Where did you get the bedspread?

A. I really don't know where it

came from.

Q. How long had you had it?

A. I don't know that either.

Q. Okay. When you were in the

rooming house either time you were up there,

did you see anyone else besides the lady that

you paid the money to? Did you see anyone

else that appeared to be walking around up

there or someone who was a resident of that

place?

A. No. I didn't see anyone all the

time I was up there.

Q. Okay. Mr. Ray, after you paid

her for the money to rent the room, did you

ever go into the bathroom?

A. I may have, but I don't have no

recollection of it.

Q. Where was the bathroom in

relation to the room that you rented?

A. Well, I subsequently discovered

that it was across -- across the hall and

further back down -- back down the hall.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2031

Q. It was on the same side of the

building as your room?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Can you describe the

bathroom for me?

A. No, I can't.

Q. You don't remember what --

A. Well, I have seen pictures of

it. I can describe it now, yes.

Q. Did the bathroom have a window

in it?

A. Yes. The pictures I saw, it had

a bathtub in it, and it had windows in it and

a toilet bowl, and I believe that was it.

Q. Okay. Did you ever look out the

window in the bathroom?

A. No, I didn't.

Q. When you were in the bathroom,

was that the first time you were up there,

the second time you were up there, the third

time you were up there?

A. I don't know if I was in the

bathroom. I said I may have been in it, but

I don't have any kind of recollection of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2032

being in it.

Q. Let me ask you something. You

first paid her the rent for the room, and how

long were you there before Raul came up

roughly?

A. Not very long. Once I got back

-- I was in the room, I don't think it was

over five minutes at the most, probably more

like three or four.

Q. And that's when he suggested you

go get the binoculars; is that right?

A. Yes. There was also a -- a

suggestion I bring my clothing up there too.

Q. All right. Was that the first

time -- in other words, when he came up

first, is that when he suggested you bring

your clothing up, the first time he came up?

A. Yes. He mentioned that early on

when we first got there.

Q. Okay. So the first time you

were there some five minutes when Raul came

up, and he suggested you go get your personal

articles, whatever it might be, and bring it

up to the room; is that right?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2033

A. Yes. He mentioned we might be

there two or three days during the

conversation.

Q. Did you tell him you had checked

in under the name of Willard -- used the name

Willard?

A. No. We had had a conversation

before about what -- my name. He wanted me

-- he suggested I check in under the name of

Galt when we -- when I met him at the New

Rebel Motel. And I told him I didn't want to

do that. I thought it would be a mistake if

there was going to be guns around there. So

--

Q. But you did do that, didn't you?

A. Pardon?

Q. You did do that, didn't you?

A. No, I didn't.

Q. In the New Rebel Motel, you

didn't check in under the name of Galt?

A. Yes, I did there, but when we

was talking about renting a room at the --

subsequently at Jim's Grill or something, it

was some conversation about renting a room

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2034

there. But I don't think there was any -- it

was a -- I can't recall just exactly what it

was, but there was some -- somewhere I got

some recollection about using my name for

renting rooms. And so I just used the name

Willard.

Q. Okay. You, were there some five

minutes when he came up and suggested you go

get your personal articles out of your car.

You did that; is that correct?

A. Yes, that's correct.

Q. You were back up there, and how

--

A. I don't know when I got the

articles. I got them sometime during that

first -- one of them trips. I brought the

overnight case up there and a sheet or a

bedspread.

Q. Had you brought it up there

before you purchased the binoculars and

brought those up there?

A. I really don't know, but I know

I brought them up there. But I don't know

just when I brought them up there.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2035

Q. All right. About what time did

you go get the room roughly? You were

supposed to meet him at 3:30, and you were a

little late. What time -- would it have been

4:00 o'clock, 4:30?

A. When I rented the room? Yes, I

think it would have been -- it's really just

hard to say. I think it would have been

somewhere between 4:00 and 4:30, in that

general area because I know I was late when I

got up there. It wasn't no 3:00 or 3:30.

Q. Okay. All right. You had got

in the Mustang and left and gone to look for

a service station. What happened then?

A. Well, as I mentioned, the

attendant at the service station I stopped

at, he said that it was either a busy time of

day or he couldn't get it right away. I

wanted to get it fixed right away. And then

I think it was another service station across

from it or across the street or maybe on the

same side of the street. One time I thought

maybe I would stop there, but I'm not -- I

can't swear to that. I really don't think I

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2036

did.

Anyway, I left there, and after

-- I couldn't get the tire fixed, and I kept

on going south, and then turned right, which

would have brought me onto Main Street. And

then when I got to Main Street, I looked --

Q. Were you going north or south on

Main Street?

A. Pardon?

Q. Were you going north or south on

Main Street?

A. I wasn't on Main Street then.

Q. I thought you said you got on

Main Street.

A. I was going to get on -- try to

get on Main Street.

Q. Okay.

A. I don't know what the street was

I was going south on, but I turned right in

order to get on Main Street because I had

been -- I had made the square then. When I

got to Main Street, I looked right, and there

appeared to be some policemen there or people

running around down there.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2037

Q. Were you going north or south on

Main then?

A. I wasn't going south. I was

coming to the intersection. I was going

west.

Q. You were not on Main Street?

A. No, I wasn't on Main Street at

that time.

Q. Okay.

A. I was right at the intersection.

Q. All right.

A. It appeared to be this policeman

or someone running around down there, and

there was also -- I saw a squad car down

there. He was parked either at the

intersection or near the intersection. It

looked like he was blocking off the street to

me. So instead of turning right and going

back in front of Jim's Grill, I turned left

in the direction out of town.

Q. Okay. Where did you go from

there?

A. Well, I drove through -- the

neighborhood I drove through looked like it

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2038

was kind of a -- well, it was a run down

neighborhood. It was a black neighborhood,

and I drove kind of slow through there. And

finally I got on one of the main streets. I

think was veering off to the left where I

could, you know, get on one of the main

streets. And then when I got on one of the

main streets, I just kept driving slow.

And somewhere -- it was my

intentions -- I was going -- I had Raul's

phone number, and I was going to talk to his

intermediary and ask him what, if anything,

was going on there. So I didn't want to room

at a place where, you know, the police just

raided or something. So anyway, after --

Q. Where was his intermediary

supposed to be?

A. I don't know his name.

Q. Where was he supposed -- you

don't know where was it in the same area code

as Memphis or a different area?

A. No, it was New Orleans.

Q. Okay. And what time are we

talking about here roughly?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2039

A. Well, it was -- I imagine it

would be a little after six o'clock.

Q. How did you try to call him?

A. I didn't call him.

Q. You did not call him?

A. No. I was going -- I intended

to call him, but on the way out of town, I

think I was -- I got to -- about 10 or 15

minutes, there was a report on the radio that

Martin Luther King had been shot. And then

wasn't paying much attention to that, but

subsequently I -- there was another report,

and they said they was looking for a white

man in a white Mustang and --

Q. Why did you think that might be

you?

A. Well, I was a white man in a

white Mustang, and, you know, I was driving a

-- there is not too many, you know, white

man in a white Mustang driving around town.

So --

Q. How do you account for that, Mr.

Ray?

A. How do I account for it?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2040

Q. That there are not many white

men driving white Mustangs?

A. Well, I assume there is not many

white Mustangs around.

Q. What makes you think that?

A. Well, that would be involved in

crimes. Of course, they wouldn't. Have had

to have been. The only thing is the car fit

my description. I would assume -- I would

have had to assume that they would probably

have been looking for me.

Q. You know there was a report that

there were two white Mustangs parked out

there that day, don't you?

A. Yes.

Q. And did you see another white

Mustang besides yours?

A. I don't have any -- I don't have

any recollection of that, no. I seen that --

there was several white cars parked along

there, that's the only recollection I have,

in that general area there on the other side

of the street.

Q. Did you call this number that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2041

you had for Raul?

A. No. After I -- after I got the

second report about the white man in the

white Mustang, then I decided, you know, not

to contact him. Instead of -- I think I --

by that time I was probably in Mississippi.

So the first opportunity I had I turned left

and got on the -- got on another highway

going towards Birmingham.

Q. Okay. So you intended to leave?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Did you contact Raul

then any time that day or the next day?

A. No. I never had any more

contacts with anyone after that, with him or

anyone else.

Q. Well, why did you not contact

Raul because you had left your personal

belongings back there? You knew he had the

gun that you had purchased back there. I

mean why did you not contact him?

A. I could contact his

intermediary, but I certainly wouldn't want

to contact him if someone has been murdered

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2042

or a major crime had taken place. I just

assumed I had been had or something.

Q. Well, you had no reason to

contact him several months before that.

A. Well, there hadn't been any

serious crimes taken place where I was a

suspect.

Q. But what made you think you

would be involved in this, Mr. Ray, if you

hadn't actually done it?

A. What makes me think I would be

involved in it?

Q. Yes, sir. What made you think

that any police officer or any law

enforcement official would think you were

involved in this if you weren't actually

involved in it?

A. Well, they were stopping a white

man in a white Mustang.

Q. How did you know that?

A. Well, they had the report on the

radio, so they must have been stopping them.

Q. Did you know of anyone they

stopped in a white Mustang? Did you hear them

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2043

say, we stopped X number of people in a white

Mustang -- white men in white Mustangs?

A. No. But they had a report out

on the police radios to look for a white man

in a white Mustang as a suspect in the

shooting of some individual. You have to --

it was more to it than just the Martin Luther

King case. I had 20 years in the Missouri

prison, and didn't want to get, you know,

stopped for anything.

Q. Okay. Well, now, we're looking

at about six o'clock, and you left and you

entered the state of Mississippi you think?

A Yes.

Q. All right. And where did you go

from there?

A. Well, I turned left and went to

Birmingham, and on the way to Birmingham it

started raining slightly, and I threw

everything -- all the camera equipment --

Raul never did pick it up in Mexico. He

told me to just hold on to it. I threw all

the camera equipment in a ditch and wiped my

prints off the Mustang, and then I went on --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2044

and then I drove on into Atlanta.

Q. But, now, let me make sure I

understand something. Simply because you

heard that Dr. King had been shot and there

was a white man in a white Mustang they were

looking for, you assumed it was you?

A. Yes.

Q. Is that right? You had no other

reason to --

A. Well, I assumed it was possible

-- a strong possibility that they were

looking for me just based on what I had heard

on the radio.

Q. Well, Mr. Ray, were they looking

for you because you actually did it?

A. No, I don't think they were.

Q. You wound up in Birmingham at

what time?

A. I wound up in Birmingham about

-- sometime during the night. I don't know

what time it was.

Q. Okay. That, same night or the

next day?

A. No. It would have been the same

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2045

night. I would say it was about one or two

o'clock.

Q. All right. Did you try to call

Raul or his intermediary then?

A. No. Once I left, I didn't have

no further contact with Raul or his

intermediary or anyone else after I left

Memphis.

Q. You never did try to contact

him?

A. No, I never did.

Q. Well, I mean is there some

reason for that because you had been

contacting him pretty regularly the last few

months before that.

A. Well, I had, but the situation

was different. Before that we hadn't had --

I hadn't -- you know, I hadn't been -- any

indications that there was any crimes

committed. And the radio report, you know,

they changed that altogether.

Q. I thought you had been sitting

here telling me yesterday and today you knew

he was into crime all the time. You knew he

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2046

was doing criminal activities or thought he

was.

A. Yeah, but we wasn't -- it wasn't

-- it was a different situation. If you

commit a crime and you get away with it more

or less, taking something across the border,

you don't just -- there is no reason then to

cut off all contacts with some individual.

However, if you are involved in something,

and the police are going to connect you with

some, type of serious crime, then you -- I

know that's the way my thinking is, get away

from them and --

Q. Well, did you think Raul had

committed this crime?

A. Well, I really didn't know. I

think it's a possibility of it. Someone --

of course, someone had been up there with

him. I didn't know.

Q. What made you think he committed

it?

A. Well, I didn't necessarily think

he committed it, but he was up there, and he

was interested in the rifle, and you had to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2047

come to that conclusion.

Q. Well, you knew Dr. King was in

Memphis and knew where he was staying, didn't

you?

A. I didn't know anything about Dr.

King, no.

Q. All right. You -- how long did

you stay in Birmingham?

A. I just went -- I just drove

through there.

Q. All right. And where did you go

from there?

A. I went to Atlanta.

Q. And how long did you stay in

Atlanta?

A. Well, I arrived there, I would

say, in -- I would say it was daylight, seven

or eight o'clock, and stayed there about-- I

caught a bus out of Atlanta about four

o'clock. So I stayed there from about eight

o'clock until four o'clock.

Q. All right. And where did you go

on the bus ride?

A. I went to, I believe it was,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2048

Indianapolis, Indiana. I'm not certain.

Q. Did you Stay all night there or

did you leave there and go on somewhere else?

A. No. I think we got there about

two or three o'clock in the morning, and it

was a layover there. And from -- and then

from there I went to Detroit on the bus.

Q. Okay. Where had you left the

Mustang?

A. I left it in Atlanta.

Q. Where in Atlanta?

A. I left it in a private parking

lot.

Q. At that time, Mr. Ray, when you

left the Mustang, did you think you were a

suspect in this assassination?

A. Well, I thought it was a

possibility of it, yes.

Q. Other than the fact you had a --

you were a white man in a white Mustang, what

else led you to think that?

A. Well, just our whole actions

before that. We had been involved in

criminal activities and drug smuggling

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2049

apparently, and then he asked me to purchase

the rifle. And I just more or less had to

assume based on my situation at the time, you

know, the police were after me on other

charges, that I could very well have been

involved indirectly in the Martin Luther King

murder.

Q. Well, were you involved

indirectly?

A. Indirectly?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. I probably was, yes.

Q. To what extent?

A. Well, I was hauling Raul around

the country and doing things for him. I

didn't have any was involved indirectly, but

I didn't necessarily know what he was doing.

Q. Okay. Did he ever mention Dr.

King to you?

A. No, he didn't.

Q. Did you ever see him with a

newspaper or reading anything about the

accounts of Dr. King's activities?

A. I never seen him reading any

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2050

newspaper.

Q. Okay.

A. The only time he read a

newspaper or anything was when we -- when we

was, I think, looking for the Aeromarine

Supply when we was trying to purchase the

rifle.

Q. But let me ask you something.

You said you hadn't listened to the news, you

told me earlier, because you didn't know

anything Dr. King's accounts. Why were you

listening to the news on this particular

night after the assassination? You happened

to be listening to it?

A. I always leave the radio on when

I'm driving because it's kind of boring.

Q. But you took note of the news

this night?

A. Yes.

Q. You hadn't taken the news of any

of the events before that, but you did this

night?

A. Yes.

Q. That's a true statement?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2051

A. Well, I don't know what you're

suggesting. I turned the radio on. Whatever

comes on the radio, that's what I listen to.

Q. I asked you earlier if you had

seen newspapers. We were having tremendous

riots in Memphis. People had been killed.

Dr. King was there, and you said you didn't

know a thing about any of this, and now all

of a sudden after he's assassinated, within

ten minutes, you know he's been assassinated?

A. Well, it was on the radio, and,

of course, there was riots all over the

United States at that time.

Q. Yes, sir. That was on the radio

and tv and the newspaper, the riots too, all

the headlines.

A. Yeah. But if I would have been

just driving down the street and something

about Martin Luther King or anyone else, I

wouldn't have thought anything about it, but

they was talking about a white man in a white

Mustang, and I was kind of hyped up anyway

because I saw the police in that general

area, so naturally I took notice of it.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2052

Q. Okay. Mr. Ray, the police were

in that general area when you got there

because there were plenty of police officers

at the fire station no more than a block or

so away, almost within sight of it. You

didn't see that?

A. Did I see them?

Q. Yes, sir. There were plenty of

them there when you got there if you got

there when you say you did.

A. Well, when are you talking

about? When I first went there before --

Q. When you first went there and

moved the Mustang and brought it up in front

of Jim's Grill where you said you parked it

some 15 or 20 feet away. Did you see plenty

of police officers within a block there?

A. No. I don't have no

recollection, and I don't have any

recollection of them seeing me there.

Q. Well, you're bound to have

driven north on Main Street at some point if

you parked on the right side facing north

next to Jim's Grill, and it was just south of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2053

this where the fire station was located.

A. It's my understanding all these

police were called off a couple of hours

before Dr. King was shot. So I think the

only police there was in the fire house just

based on records I have read.

Q. All right. You had traveled

through Indianapolis and onto, what, Canada?

A. From Detroit, yes, I went to

Canada.

Q. All right. And then how long

did you stay in Canada?

A. Well, I arrived there -- let's

see -- probably April 6th, and I stayed there

until -- well, I stayed there until I got a

passport, whatever date that was.

Q. Okay. How did you -- how did

you get a passport? What did you do to get a

passport this time?

A. Well, the first time I went to

Canada I called up the travel agency, and

they give -- they told me about -- I needed a

guarantor, someone who knew for me for two

years before I could get a passport and swear

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2054

who I was.

The second time I went up there,

instead of calling the travel agency by

telephone, I went down there personally, and

I talked to the travel agent.

Q. What name did you use? Who did

you tell them you were?

A. What name did I use then? Well,

I got a name out of a newspaper, Raymon

George Sneyd.

Q. Okay.

A. So I explained to the lady -- I

told her I was from a town in north Canada --

I can't think of the -- Sudbury. And I told

her I was a used car salesman from there, and

that -- I give her some type of story where I

was having trouble getting identification. I

wasn't from the Toronto area. And she

explained to me -- she said there was -- she

said you need a guarantor for two years who

will swear that they know you, and I told

her, you know, I didn't know anyone in the

Toronto area because I was from Sudbury. So

then she told me that --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2055

Q. Had you ever been in Toronto

before this?

A. Well, I went through there, I

believe it was, in 1959 on the way to

Montreal.

Q. Okay.

A. But she told me that there --

there was another clause in the passport law

that if you would sign a sworn affidavit

saying who you were representing yourself as,

you could get a passport.

Q. Well, what identification did

you have to prove that you were who you said

you were?

A. Well, at that time I don't

believe I had any identification. I just had

the guy's name. Subsequently I think I got

his birth certificate, but I wrote the

Registrar General's office and sent in $2. I

found out how to get the birth certificate.

Q. Okay.

A. But I never did need that

anyway. But anyway, I signed this, affidavit

saying I was so and so. But before I applied

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2056

for it, I had three different names, and I

called up some of these individuals, this

list of three names, and I found out that

Raymon George Sneyd never had a passport, so

I assumed then his photograph wouldn't be on

record. So I applied -- I applied for the

passport in his name.

Q. And you did get it?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. You left then Toronto,

and where did you go?

A. Well, I bought a round trip

ticket to London, England.

Q. Okay. How much did you pay for

that?

A. I think about $350.

Q. How long had you been in Toronto

when you left?

A. Well, I had to wait for the

passport. I guess it was about sometime in

May.

Q. Okay. And you had been there

since April the 6th?

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2057

Q. Okay. Did you get any more

money from any source?

A. No, I didn't.

Q. Now, you told me in Memphis you

had 15 or $1,600?

A. That's about what I had, yes.

Q. All right. And you stayed there

from April until in May?

A. Yes.

Q. And where were you living?

A. Well, I was living at two

addresses. I was living on Ossington Avenue.

I checked in there first, and I told the

lady I worked -- let's see -- I told her I

worked days, I think it was. And then I

checked into another room on the street right

around there. It was a couple of blocks from

there. I don't recall the name. That was --

some Chinese lady owned it, and I told her I

worked nights so that way I would have a

reason to be --

Q. How much were you paying for

these rooms?

A. Not too much, 10 or $12.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2058

Q. Was it 10, 15, $20 a night?

A. Yes, a week.

Q. A week?

A. Yes.

Q. Were you working anywhere?

A. Was I working?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. No, I wasn't.

Q. Okay. Did you pull any

robberies?

A. No, I didn't.

Q. Okay. About when did you leave

to go to London, May what?

A. I just can t remember those

dates. It was sometime in May, but I --

Q. The middle of May, first of May,

last of May roughly?

A. It was probably the 8th or l0th,

9th or l0th. I don't know.

Q. Okay. And you flew on what

airline?

A. The British -- BOA, I believe it

is.

Q. Had you ever been to London

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2059

before?

A. No, I hadn't.

Q. And you had one passport?

A. Yes.

Q. All right. Did you -- when you

arrived in London, how long did you stay

there before you left?

A. Well, when I first arrived

there, I exchanged the ticket for a ticket to

Portugal.

Q. And what was the purpose for

that?

A. To go to Portugal?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. Well, I was going to try to

catch a ship to some English speaking country

in Africa.

Q. Rhodesia?

A. No, not necessarily. Any -- the

first country I was going to try to go to was

Nigeria and Biafra. There is two countries

there, Nigeria, and Biafra is a province of

Nigeria.

Q. How long were you in London

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2060

before you exchanged your ticket?

A. Before I exchanged the ticket?

Q Yes, sir.

A. Same day.

Q. Same day?

A. Yes.

Q. You didn't stay in London then

overnight before you left or did you stay

overnight?

A. I don't believe I stayed

overnight. I think I left that night. I

think I arrived there in the morning and left

at night.

Q. And you flew on into Portugal?

A. Yes.

Q. And how long did you stay there?

A. Ten or twelve days.

Q. Okay. And what did you do while

you were in Portugal?

A. Well, at that time I was getting

kind of low on money. I was going to try to

catch a ship. That's the cheapest fare. So I

--

Q. How much money did you have?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2061

A. I really don't know. It wasn't

too much by that time, a few hundred dollars,

but I just can't recall.

Q. Now, had you purchased a round

trip ticket from Toronto to London?

A. Yes.

Q. And you exchanged the ticket for

a ticket to Portugal?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you have to pay anything to

do that?

A. I don't -- I really don't know

how much they cost me extra or I got

something back. I just don't recall it.

Q. When you were in Portugal, where

did you stay there?

A. The Hotel of Portugal.

Q. Did you see anyone there that

you knew?

A. No. I seen some individuals

that worked in the government, but didn't see

anyone there that I knew.

Q. And then after you left there,

where did you go?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2062

A. After I left Portugal?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. Well, after I couldn't get out

of the country, I was having problems getting

a visa and all that, I went back to London.

Q. Mr. Ray, why did you pick

Portugal? I mean, of all countries, why did

you pick there to go from London?

A. How come I went to Portugal

initially?

Q. Yes, sir. I mean why did you

decide to go there instead of some other

country?

A. Well, it's a seaport, and, you

know, you can -- I assumed that -- I knew a

little bit about geography, and I assumed you

probably could catch a ship out of there. I

didn't have too much money. I tried to --

Q. You never tried to contact

Raul?

A. No. When I was in Portugal, the

only one I contacted-- I did contact some

Portuguese official in the Foreign Ministry

and asked him about, you know, going to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2063

Biafra or something. And he recommended some

private organization, and I checked with it.

But that's the only -- that's the only

contacts I had ever had in Portugal.

Q. Well, let me ask you something.

After you left Memphis to go to Birmingham to

Atlanta and on into Indianapolis and Detroit

and Toronto, what is the reason you didn't

contact, Raul again? He had been supporting

you for months, and why didn't you support --

why didn't you contact him again?

A. You mean after the Martin Luther

King homicide?

Q. Right. I mean had no reason to

think he was involved in it, did you?

A. Well, I had to suspect he -- he

was in the rooming house, and subsequently I

found out, you know, from reports -- I mean,

that would have been the last individual I

would contact. I mean I didn't know who he

was. He could have been a -- you know, he

could have tried to kill me or something. I

was concerned about, you know, surviving. I

wasn't concerned about, you know, contacting

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2064

him or what he could do for me.

Q. Well, you had been doing all

these things for him previously, and he

hadn't tried to kill you. You even had a --

you even gave him a gun, and he didn't try to

kill you?

A. Yeah, but he wasn't involved in

no murder charge then either.

Q. But you didn't know what he had

been involved in. You didn't know who the

man was, did you?

A. Well, I assumed he was involved

in it because he was in the rooming house.

Q. But you didn't know his last

name, never knew where he was from, never

knew anything about him, did you?

A. No.

Q. He could have killed 10 people

for all you knew, couldn't he?

A. He could have, yes.

Q. And you weren't afraid of him

then, all these times you were in the rooms

with him, and you rode to Atlanta and

Birmingham with him, and you had got him a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2065

gun and all, and you weren't afraid of him

then, were you, Mr. Ray?

A. No, I wasn't. I wasn't

concerned with him then because I had no

reason to be, you know, afraid of him. I

have been connected with a lot of criminals.

I wasn't afraid of them, but you get one of

them where they're involved in a murder or

something like that, you have to be a little

cautious with them.

Q. Well, what made you think he

would -- if you called him on the telephone,

now, what made you think that would lead to

where you were? I mean you knew how to make

a telephone call without it being --

A. Well, what was the point --

there was no point in calling him on the

telephone unless I was going to meet him or

have him send some money or something.

Q. Well, you had had several

contacts before. You called him from Los

Angeles. You were calling him from other

cities. Over the several months you had

called him many times, hadn't you?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2066

A. Yeah, but I didn't have no

reason to call him after that. The only

reason I called him is asking for some money

or to have a meeting with him. I didn't --

certainly didn't want to have any meeting

with him.

Q. Well, you hadn't had any

hesitance in calling him before this, though,

asking for money, had you?

A. Yeah. Well, I was moving pretty

fast, you know, after I thought. The police

were after me, and I didn't -- I just didn't

have no interest in contacting him or anyone

else I knew. I didn't even contact my

brothers or no one.

Q. And the only reason you thought

the police were after you is because you were

a white man in a white Mustang when you left

Memphis? That's the only reason you --

A. Well, initially that's what I

thought, but I got to hear more newspaper

reports and things, and I --

Q. Well, what would newspapers and

reports -- I thought you didn't read the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2067

newspaper and didn't keep up with the news?

A. I bought a -- I buy -- I used to

buy a newspaper every morning and read it if

there was something interesting. I don't

remember everything I read in the newspaper.

Q. But that wasn't interesting when

you were in Mississippi at the Desoto Motel,

and you were going into Memphis, Tennessee

where we had had riots and people killed?

That wasn't interesting to you knowing you

were going right in there in the area?

A. That would not have been

interesting to --

Q. That wasn't interesting to you?

A. No.

Q. Okay. But this was interesting

after you left Memphis knowing that the only

reason they had to suspect you was that you

were a white man in a white Mustang. That

was the only reason, and you became

interested in the news then?

A. Well, that would have been a

personal interest. I mean you're talking

about riots. That doesn't interest me at

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2068

all. I didn't care what the -- you know,

what the riots were doing.

Q. Then when you get back to London

the second time, you were arrested, weren't

you?

A. Yes.

Q. Mr. Ray, were you ever in behind

Jim's Grill at any time?

A. No, I wasn't.

Q. You were never there?

A. No.

Q. All right. Did you ever see the

Lorraine Motel any time you were in Memphis

--

A. I don't have any --

Q. -- where you actually looked at

it?

A. I don't have any recollection of

ever seeing it. I may have seen it, but I

don't know.

Q. Have you ever actually seen --

I'm talking about with your eyes -- Dr.

Martin Luther King where you actually looked

at him in person?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2069

A. I have seen him on television.

Q. No, sir. Have you ever seen him

in person?

A. No.

Q. You have never --

A. No, I haven't.

Q. Okay. Have you ever identified

a photograph of someone that you thought was

Raul?

A. Yes, I did. In the late 19 --

late 1970's, yes.

Q. Was that the person?

A. Yes, it was.

Q. It was the person?

A. I was almost certain it was,

yes.

Q. Okay. What led you to think it

was the same person? I mean, was there

anything about him, any scars about him,

anything such as change of hair or same --

what led you to think he was the same person?

A. It was just the physical

characteristics of him, and he just looked

like him.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2070

Q. The photograph you saw, was it

of his whole body, waist up, just face or

what?

A. No. It was the -- it was his

face.

Q. Okay. Have you been shown

another photograph recently of some person

that you identified as being this individual?

A. I think we should reserve an

answer on that because we're checking into

things. This thing is --

Q. Well, Mr. Ray, I know all about

that. We're checking into it, but I'm just

asking you, is this the same photograph you

had seen earlier?

A. You mean the one they showed to

me recently?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. Well, I think I better reserve

an answer on that until maybe -- well, not to

-- not to --

Q. Mr. Ray, I already know what

you're supposed to have said. So I mean you

can reserve it if you want to. I already

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2071

know what you were supposed to have said.

A. Yeah. The point is --

MR. PEPPER: Listen to

what he's going to say now.

Q. I understand.

A. The point is that I keep records

of all this, you know, the time back, but

sometimes your records get mixed up. And you

send them to someone because -- so I want to

keep these as specific as I can when I start

testifying because one reason is I have

always had have a lot of problems with the

news media, and if you're wrong on a date or

a time or something like that -- I'm talking

about the dominate news media -- well,

they'll say, Well, Ray, he's lied about this,

he claims he was here at 4:00 o'clock, and he

wasn't. He was there at 4:30. And generally

these people have been very hostile, and they

just look upon someone like me as -- with by

background as more or less vermin. So I

don't want to give them any excuse this time

in this situation to, you know, make a big

issue out of a small matter. So I want to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2072

get all the details straightened out before I

--

Q. Well, were you shown a

photograph of some person purporting to be

Raul within the past few days?

A. Yes, I was.

Q. Other than the two times in

Jim's Grill -- that you have identified as

being in Jim's Grill, were you ever in there

any other time?

A. I thought maybe I was in there a

third time, but I probably wasn't. And I

just -- I think it was just twice.

Q. You had gotten a passport in

Toronto after you were there the last time,

which took you, what, one day to find out

what it took to get a passport?

A. Well, I went to Kennedy Travel

Agency, and the lady there, she explained it

to me, you know, the procedure to get -- to

obtain one.

Q. But you had contacted a travel

agency before that when you were there before

to try to get --

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2073

A. Yeah. I made a mistake.

Instead of going directly to the travel

agency when I went to Canada the first time I

tried to make those -- get the information

all on the telephone, and consequently I

didn't get the information about this special

procedure where you sign a sworn affidavit

saying your -- you know, you're who you're

representing yourself as.

Q. Were you ever in Houston, Texas?

A. No. I don't believe I was, no.

Q. Did you have any reason to think

that Raul was ever in Houston, Texas?

A. Well, I know the people that's

been investigating Raul and Percy Foreman,

he's from Texas too -- but I don't know --

I'm not conversing with all these

investigations.

Q. Did Mr. Foreman tell you he knew

Raul?

A. No. He didn't -- he didn't say

anything about whether he knew Raul. He

mentioned -- the closest he ever come to

Raul, there was a picture in, I think it was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2074

Life Magazine, and three bums were arrested

on the Kennedy assassination, and he wanted

to know if the Prosecution would arrest him

and bring him to Memphis, would I identify

him as Raul. And I said no because the

individual in the picture was -- he had some

resemblance toward Raul, but it wasn't

Raul. But other than that, he never

mentioned -- that was the last time he ever

mentioned anyone named Raul.

Q. Before today -- before yesterday

have you ever seen Mr. Jowers face-to-face?

A. No, I haven't. I don't have no

recollection of ever seeing him.

Q. Okay. Do you have any knowledge

of any involvement he had in the

assassination of Dr. King?

A. Do I have any knowledge? Not

direct, just what I have heard on -- you

know, through the news media.

Q. All right. As to the Prime Time

-- ABC Prime Time --

A. Yes.

Q. -- that's the only thing you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2075

know, what you saw on there?

A. Well, the lawyer discussed this

lawsuit with me and certain aspects of it,

but --

Q. Do you know of any witness that

says that he had any involvement in it?

A. Do I know of any witnesses?

Q. Do you know of any witnesses or

been told of any witnesses that says Mr.

Jowers had any involvement in this

assassination?

A. The only thing I know is what,

you know, I have read in the newspapers and

what the attorneys have -- they haven't --

the attorneys -- well, they don't go into all

the details, and I let them handle it. I

have got enough to do without, you know,

staying briefed on all the details of this

case.

Q. Okay. Mr. Ray, you have been in

prison now for 26 years?

A. Yes.

Q. Twenty- six years ago Friday; is

that right?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2076

A. Well, I can't --

Q. Well, actually you pled guilty?

A. Yes, 1969.

Q. Twenty-six years of your life?

A. Yes.

Q. Mr. Ray, under oath, did you

assassinate Dr. Martin Luther King?

A. Did I?

Q. Yes, sir.

A. No, I didn't.

Q. Did you ever shoot at him?

A. No.

Q. Do you know who did?

A. No, I don't.

Q. Did you write that book?

A. Yes. I wrote it, but I'm not

responsible for everything in it.

Q. Well, who actually did the --

actually put it together?

A. Well, I'll try to explain it

from the beginning. Initially this book was

written by -- published by one Tupper

Saussy."

MR. BLEDSOE: Leaving off on

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2077

page 285, line 13, going to page 292, line

14.

THE COURT: Well, let's break

for lunch here at this point.

(Lunch recess.)

THE COURT: Are we ready for the

jury?

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: All right. Are you

ready?

(The deposition of James Earl

Ray was continued to be read to the jury with

the excerpts noted as follows.)

MR. BLEDSOE: 292, line 14.

This is on page 296, line 6.

"Q. Okay. Did you ever know a Frank

Liberto, Mr. Ray?

A. No, I didn't.

Q. Have you ever heard that name called?

A. Yes, I have.

Q. When did you hear it called?

A. I don't know the first time. I think

there was something about it in the -- there

was a Congressional committee investigating

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2078

the Martin Luther King case in 1966-1977,

1978. I think then they referred to Frank

Liberto.

Then I believe -- if that's the

Memphis produce person you are talking about,

I have heard it from some other source, but I

can't recall just what all the sources I have

heard it from.

Q. You have never heard that name called

before sometime later on? You never --

A. I think the first time I heard it was

1977 or 1978.

Q. Were you ever at the L & L & L

Produce Company in Memphis at any time? Have

you ever been there?

A. No, no.

Q. Okay. Were you ever in a bar in

Memphis that you can remember except the bars

you mentioned earlier?

A. No. Just the ones on Main Street is

the only ones I can recall.

Q. Okay. Other than Raul, did you have

any contact with other persons in Memphis

when you were there?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2079

A. No, I didn't.

Q. And you have only been in Memphis one

time other than passing through this other

than the time you spoke to us about on April

4th, 1968 -- well, really April 3rd, 1968?

A. That's correct, yes.

Q. Have you ever heard of a man by the

name of Joe Cacamecei?

A. No, I haven't.

Q. Have you ever heard of a man named

Larry Mann, M A N N?

A. No, I haven't.

Q. All the time you were with Raul, Mr.

Ray, did you ever notice anything peculiar

about him? I had asked you before if he was

right-handed or left-handed, had any scars on

him. Did he like to -- did he smoke, chew

gum, anything about him that you can tell us

about?

A. No, I don't believe he smoked. I'm

not one hundred percent, but I never did -- I

don't have any recollection of seeing him

smoke. Mostly our conversation was just

business conversation. There was no social

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2080

conversation. Generally I don't pay too much

attention to males anyway unless I'm

concerned about, you know, some type of

violence.

Q. When you were in New Orleans -- when

you left Los Angeles and drove to New

Orleans, did you meet Raul again? You met

with Raul in New Orleans back in December of

1967?

A. Yes, I did.

Q. Okay. Where did you meet him?

A. The Le Bunny Lounge on Canal Street.

Q. Did you meet him more than once?

A. No, just that one time.

Q. Okay. How long were you in his

presence, then?

A. Not too long.

Q. I mean, five minutes?

A. Thirty minutes probably.

Q. Well, of course you had ridden with

him between New Orleans -- I mean Atlanta and

Birmingham. That took some hours, didn't it?

A. Well, we were on the freeway, but it

didn't take too long.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2081

Q. Well, I mean, it took you at least

two or three hours to drive from Atlanta to

Birmingham?

A. Yes.

Q. So you were with him all this time,

and you noticed nothing about the fact that

he smoked or chewed gum, any -- right-handed

or left-handed, any scars or anything about

him?

A. No, I don't believe -- I don't

believe he did chew -- I mean smoke.

Q. Okay. When you left the Mustang in

Atlanta, was it locked?

A. I believe it was, yes.

Q. Okay. According to the FBI report,

there were a lot of ashes in the ashtray and

the car was generally dirty. Do you know how

that came about?

A. No. There were cigarette butts in

the ashtray they claim, but I never did look

in the ashtray because I don't smoke, and

there wouldn't have been no point in me

checking it, but I don't know -- I don't know

how they got in there.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2082

Q. Okay. You have a lawsuit against

Mr. Jowers now, Mr. Ray, in a case pending in

Supreme Court. Is there any other type

litigation pending that you are involved in

at this time?

A. Litigation, yes, sir, there is.

Q. What else?

A. Well, I have one in -- I have two

lawsuits in the district court here in

Nashville, one of them is trying to get

ex-Governor Ed McWherter's criminal -- I'm

trying to get the file on him when he was

under investigation for criminal activities

several years ago.

Q. You are losing me.

A. Well, in 19 -- two or three years

ago, several of McWherter's aids were under

investigation for corruption, and two of them

committed suicide. And I have been trying to

get a copy of those records.

Q. How do you think that would affect

your case?

A. Well, McWherter, he has been very

hostile toward my interests, I guess would

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2083

you call it, and I just want to see what his

motive is.

Q. You have two lawsuits pending in US

District Court here in Nashville?

A. Yes, that's one of the other one --

Q. Who is your lawyer on that case?

A. That is pro se.

Q. All right. What else?

A. The other one -- the other one is

a -- it's a Freedom of Information Act. Both

of them is Freedom of Information Act. The

other one is for some other government

records. I can't recall just exactly --

Q. Where is it pending? Is that in the

Federal Court also?

A. It is also in the district court here

in Nashville.

Q. Okay. You've got those two pending

and you've got the one in Memphis, and have

you got an appeal to the Supreme Court? What

else? Anything else?

A. I have got one in Washington DC for

the classified records of the Martin Luther

King case. I'm waiting on a decision on

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2084

that.

Q. What court is that in?

A. It is in the United States District

Court for the District of Columbia.

Q. And it's pro se also?

A. Yes. And I have got one against the

Tennessee Board of Paroles.

Q. Okay. Where is it filed?

A. It is in the Circuit Court in

Nashville.

Q. Okay. And what's the nature of the

lawsuit?

A. Well, we contend when I had a parole

hearing -- not a parole --

Q. Last year?

A. Yes. Apparently the parole board

decided beforehand not to give me a parole.

They had a hearing beforehand which would

have been in violation of the Open Records

Act, the Sunshine Law, and I have an attorney

representing me on that named Andrew Hall in

Wartberg, Tennessee.

Q. Any other litigation pending other

than what we just talked about?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2085

A. I may have some. I can't think of

right now, but I think it is -- I believe

that's it.

Q. Okay. You had quite a number of

lawsuits you filed in the past for libel and

other -- haven't you?

A. Yes.

Mr. Garrison: Let me have just a

second here. A brief recess was taken.

Mr. Garrison: I don't have any further

questions. Mr. Pepper, I'm sorry?

Mr. Garrison: I don't have any further

questions.

Mr. Pepper: Okay. I have just a

few matters to go back over to amplify the

record, and then I will be through.

Cross-examination by Mr. Pepper.

Q. James, it is very difficult for you

to recall physical lay-outs as well as times

of any procedure twenty-six years

afterwards. Do you recall when you parked

the car by or around Jim's Grill facing north

on the afternoon of April 4th, do you recall

seeing a fire plug anywhere?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2086

A. I don't specifically recall seeing

one. I could have seen it.

Q. But you don't remember seeing a plug,

a fire plug, at this point anywhere? Would

you -- if there was a fire plug around where

you parked, would you have been concerned

about parking too closely to it or attracting

police attention, or would you have avoided

that?

A. Oh, yes, I wouldn't have parked

around no -- I wouldn't park around a fire

plug, no.

Q. Right. So if I advise you as a

matter of fact there was a fire plug south of

Jim's Grill --

A. Uh-huh.

Q. -- would you say then that you would

have endeavored to park away from that plug

so that you wouldn't have parked -- have been

illegally parked?

A. Yes. I wouldn't park around it. I

wouldn't have done anything to get, you know,

a traffic violation and possibly get

arrested, if that's what you mean.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2087

Q. And if you were parking away from

that -- away from that plugs, would you have

parked -- because you were talking about

being close to Jim's Grill -- would you have

parked north or south of that plug if the

plug was south of Jim's Grill?

A. And I had a choice?

Q. Yes.

A. Well, I suppose I would park north of

it if I had a choice unless it was right in

front of Jim's Grill.

Q. If there was a space there?

A. Yes, I would --

Q. But your testimony here is that you

don't recall -- you don't remember now --

your current recollection is that you don't

remember seeing that plug --

A. No, I don't.

Q. -- at this point that you would have

parked north of there? Directing you to the

very early part of your testimony, you

mentioned a fellow who was an FBI informant

named Jack Gawron.

A. Yes.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2088

Q. All right. With whom you had some

contact --

A. Yes.

Q. -- and did some time with your

brother. Do you know if Mr. Gawron today is

alive or dead?

A. He is dead.

Q. He has died?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you or anyone else associated

with you as far as you know have any further

communication with Mr. Gawron about this case

in recent years before he died?

A. No, not about the Martin Luther King

case, no, not about --

Q. Not about that?

A. No.

Q. Do you have any reason to believe

that Mr. Gawron had any communication or any

contact with the FBI at the time you knew him

and you were on the run?

A. No.

Q. The first I knew he was an informant

is when he testified against my brother on

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2089

the bank robbery charges in 1971.

Q. But you don't know whether or not he

was in touch with the FBI at the time you saw

him when you were a fugitive from Jefferson

Penitentiary?

A. Well, I don't have any proof that he

was in contact with the FBI, but subsequently

he told them that I had robbed a bank in

Illinois, so he must been in contact with

them in 1968.

Q. All right. James, do you recall when

you went to pick up room in Cherpes' Boarding

House in Birmingham, how you learned about

that boarding house and how you got that room

there?

A. I either got it out of the newspaper

or drove around. I can't recall now. I

think I probably got it out of the newspaper,

but I'm not certain.

Q. Do you remember the exact name that

you used when -- that is on your -- on your

Alabama driver's license?

A. Eric S Gault -- Eric Starvo Gault.

Q. And I, for the record, want you to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2090

indicate, if you can, why did you use the

name -- the middle name Starvo at that point

in time?

A. I really don't know. It was just

another alias. I probably got -- I probably

heard about it or read about it or something.

Q. Did anyone tell you that you needed a

middle name -- that you needed a full middle

name for an Alabama driver's license?

A. No, but generally everyone has a

middle name, so I -- but I got the name Gault

before I ever thought about applying for an

Alabama driver's license.

Q. Did you come by that name Starvo

yourself?

A. Yes.

Q. Do you ever recall using it on any

other occasion?

A. No, not that -- no. I believe that's

the only time I ever used that name.

Q. When you left Mexico and you were

going to California and going to Los Angeles,

was it your idea to go to Los Angeles or did

Raul at any time suggest that you go to Los

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2091

Angeles?

A. When we was in Mexico?

Q. Yes.

A. No, he asked me where I was going at,

and I told him probably Los Angeles to try to

get out on a merchant seamanship or something

of that nature. I don't know just what I

told him. He said okay. He said, if you go

up there -- when you get up there, check the

post office general delivery when you --

Q. All right. Now, James, counsel for

Mr. Jowers has raised a question about

this -- about maps and markings on maps.

A. Yes.

Q. And I have seen a number of maps.

Would you just explain in your own words why

you have put markings on various maps that

you have had from time to time?

A. Well, usually when I go into a large

city, if I'm going to be there any length of

time or think I'm going to be there any

length of time, I'll put maps on -- certain

markings on them to get any bearings on where

downtown is and where I came in on and things

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2092

of that nature. In other words, just get my

bearings -- get your bearings on the city and

where you are at.

Q. Okay. In Birmingham you mentioned

several times being at the Starlight --

A. Yes.

Q. -- Lounge and meeting Raul there.

Did you at any time go to the Gulas Lounge,

which is somewhat outside of Birmingham?

A. You said it is outside of

Birmingham?

Q. It is actually within the city

limits, but it is sort of -- it is a way from

the downtown area. It is called the Gulas

Lounge.

A. No, I don't think so. The only thing

I may have testified to before, I was in a

lounge -- it might have been that name. The

lounge I'm talking about is not too far from

the train station, so it couldn't have been

that. It wouldn't have been outside of town.

Q. During the period of your fugitivity,

which was from April 23rd, 1967, until you

fled to Canada, you said it was your general

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2093

practice to buy a newspaper every day?

A. Yes.

Q. And what interested you -- what did

you read about in the newspaper? Why did you

buy that newspaper every day and did you read

it cover to cover? Was it there there

something in particular that you looked at?

What was your interest?

A. No. I would just go through and read

it in general, and I would read the sports

page, and other than that, it is just

something I kind of got in the habit of

doing, but it wasn't anything in there

specifically that I was, you know, looking

for.

Q. During the time you entered the

United States following your escape, which

would have been in late August, early

September, 1967, until Martin Luther King was

killed on April 4th, 1968, did you at any

time take a note of where Dr. King was in the

United States, what he was doing or where he

was speaking anything at all about his

movements?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2094

A. You mean from the time I escaped

until April the --

Q. From the time you came into the

United States -- I'm really talking about

that period of late August --

A. Oh, yes.

Q. -- until --

A. No, I didn't. The answer is no.

Q. And when you went to Atlanta in March

coming from Los Angeles, leaving Los Angeles

and coming to Atlanta, did you know for a

fact he was at the time -- whether or not he

was in Atlanta?

A. No. I didn't know anything about him

at that time, no.

Q. Did you have any idea why Raul

wanted you to go to Atlanta?

A. No. He didn't say. The only thing

he said -- once we got there, he said, you

know, we was going -- he wanted me to drive

him to Miami in three or four days, but I

don't know -- he didn't explain what that

deal was. So --

Q. So you didn't know why he wanted you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2095

to go to Miami?

A. No.

Q. And you didn't know why he wanted you

to go to Atlanta?

A. No.

Q. You have testified that and you have

said before that Raul seemed to have -- when

he stretched at one point he seemed to

have -- you saw in his back pocket as his

jacket raised up something that looked like a

transmitter radio when he was newspaper the

room. Could that have equally been a

walkie-talkie?

A. Well, subsequently I thought maybe

that's what it was, but I didn't know -- I

didn't pay that much attention to it.

Q. Okay. For the record, let's make it

clear. When you gave a description of what

the bathroom looked like, were you describing

the bathroom from your present recollection

of how you remembered seeing it or from the

photographs that you have observed subsequent

to the time?

A. No. It is the photographs. I've

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2096

seen photographs of the bathroom and the -- I

think it was a palm print on it and -- the

one I've seen -- or a place where a palm

print was and a bathtub. Yes, I saw --

Q. Do you have any present recollection

of what -- of how that bathroom looked?

A. No, I don't.

Q. James, did you have -- did you at any

time during the -- all of the relevant period

here when you were wandering around the

United States and taking instructions from

Raul and doing various things from him and

for yourself when you were out of contact

with him, did you at any time have a hint or

any indication or a sense yourself that you

would be becoming involved in an

assassination conspiracy against Martin

Luther King?

A. No. It was just common crimes, as

far as I was concerned, smuggling and selling

guns and things of that nature.

Q. There was never any hint in your mind

or indication that you were involved in

any -- getting involved increasingly in the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2097

conspiracy to kill Dr. King?

A. No, there wasn't, no.

Q. When was the very first time that you

actually thought you might have been so

involved, however unknowingly or implicated

or set up?

A. That would have been sometime after I

heard the report that Martin Luther King had

been shot in Memphis. I can't remember just

exactly my thought process all the way, but

sometime not too long after that I assume

that I might have been put in the position

where I could, you know, get a murder charge

against me.

Q. Did you come to believe at some point

in time that Arthur William Bradford Huie,

whose name had been raised by counsel here,

was in fact relaying information to the FBI?

A. Yes. Well, he -- first he was

publishing all this information to the -- in

the magazine, which was the same thing as

furnishing it to the FBI, and also Percy

Foreman, he told me at one time that William

Bradford Huie could get information from the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2098

FBI in a few hours that would take him a

couple of weeks to.

I don't know why Foreman told me

this, because he was representing me, but

usually it is my experience you don't give

the police -- police don't give you

information without you giving them

information. So I assume that he was

cooperating with the FBI.

And subsequently I learned, too,

through some of these books he wrote -- and I

think one of them was Three Lives in

Mississippi -- that he was, you know, he

contacted -- he would -- he would work with

the authorities to -- in racial cases.

Q. Was William Bradford Huie ever the

promotor of an offer to you to admit guilt in

this crime in exchange for money and a

pardon?

A. Yes, he was. When the Congressional

committee was investigating the case -- now,

this was in 1977 or 1978. I think it was

1977 -- he contacted my brother, Jerry Ray,

and he said that -- this was the time that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2099

Ray Blanton was having some problems with the

authorities, Governor Ray Blanton of

Tennessee, and Huie told him on the phone

that if I would go in front of the committee

and admit to shooting Martin Luther King or

words to that effect, that he would give us

two hundred fifty thousand dollars and he

could get me a pardon from governor Blanton.

He mentioned the fact that -- I

think Jerry asked him -- my brother asked him

how he would do it, and he said, well,

Blanton is having problems of his own, and he

was going to work it out through some way

based on Blanton's problems. But -- so,

anyway, my brother went and told Mark Lane

about this. He was representing me at that

time.

So Mark Lane advised my brother to

go contact Huie again and asked him to say

the same thing on the phone. So Mark Lane

gave him a -- something you can tap the phone

with, some type of device you fit on the

phone. So Huie told him subsequently that

same thing, that he could give us -- he would

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2100

give us two hundred and something thousand

dollars if we went in front of the committee

and took full responsibility for the Martin

Luther King murder.

And then after the transcript from

Martin Luther -- after he got the transcript

of the tape-recordings of this, Mark Lane

sent the tape-recording and the transcript to

the Select Committee investigating the Martin

Luther King case.

Q. Did a previous attorney of yours

named Jack Kershaw -- do you recall whether

Mr. Kershaw also communicated a similar offer

from Mr. Huie to you?

A. Yes. I can't remember the details,

but he made contact with William Bradford

Huie, and I just don't -- I don't have a

clear recollection of that. That would have

been more or less hearsay, but the one was --

he contacted my brother on the phone, and I

have actually heard the tape-recording of

it. And I have read the transcript of it.

Q. Now, in your description of Raul,

could you just amplify and only by giving us

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2101

an approximate estimate of his age as you

recall him in 1967 or 1968?

A. Well, sometimes it is difficult to

give someone's age, but I just assumed he was

between thirty-five and forty.

Q. At that time?

A. Yes.

Q. Okay. Okay. I think that is all

I -- that's all I have. Mr. Garrison: Let

me just -- Dr. Pepper: Ask him another

question, too, in regard to some of these you

have asked him here.

Redirect examination by

Mr. Garrison.

Q. Mr. Ray, I'm having problems with

your -- some of your testimony. I'm going to

be honest with you. You had a map of

Atlanta, and you have just now testified to

Dr. Pepper today that you had a habit of

getting maps when you entered large cities.

Well, you entered Memphis I know for

sure, Birmingham I know for sure. You had

never been there before. Did you have a map

where you had any markings on those cities?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2102

A. Well, in Memphis I didn't think I was

going to be there very long, a day or so.

Q. But you said you really didn't know

how long you would be there? He told you you

would be there three or four days?

A. Well, after he told me, but I had

other things to do besides, you know, run out

and start looking for maps. I was running

errands for him, and, of course, you know, we

left there the same day -- I left there the

same day. So I didn't have no opportunity to

buy maps.

Q. Well, you were in Birmingham several

days and you get get a map there, either.

A. I possibly have a map of Birmingham.

I don't know what all maps are in my personal

property. There is a list of them, but

Birmingham is a -- you know, it is not really

a large town like Atlanta.

Q. Was a palm print found in the

bathroom at this rooming house of yours?

A. I understand there was. I think I

seen a picture of it.

Q. Can you account for that?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2103

A. Well, I think William Bradford Huie

claimed it was mine, but subsequently they

found out it belonged to a policeman.

Q. Okay.

Mr. Garrison: That's all I have."

MR. BLEDSOE: That's the end of

our deposition reading.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, we

have a document we'd like to have marked as

an exhibit.

(The above-mentioned document

was marked Exhibit 37.)

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, the

defendant rests.

THE COURT: All right. Do you

have any rebuttal evidence?

MR. PEPPER: Just very few

pieces of rebuttal evidence, Your Honor.

Your Honor, firstly, plaintiffs

would like to submit and have marked into

evidence three newspaper articles that were

published at the time:

One deals with the existence of a

second white Mustang. The other two deal

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2104

with the presence of someone in the bushes.

In this article on 4/5/9 68, in the

Commercial Appeal, a journalist, Robert

Samsut, reports, "After the shot, Solomon

Jones -- who was Dr. King's chauffeur -- said

he saw a man with something white on his face

creep from a thicket across the street."

In an article published on the same

day in the Memphis Press Scimitar by Wayne --

attorney, then-journalist, Wayne Chastain,

Chastain quotes Solomon Jones as saying, "He

looked over his shoulder, and about

twenty-five feet away he saw a man jump out

of some bushes and run. He had something

white on his face."

If these may be marked collectively,

Your Honor.

(The above-mentioned documents

were marked as Collective Exhibit 38.)

MR. PEPPER: Then there are a

few very brief comments from a deposition

that plaintiffs would like to have read into

the record at this time as well. They are

strictly rebuttal evidence.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2105

If Your Honor please, we'd like

to -- I'd like to introduce a new member of

the defense team, Ms. Stacy Clinton, who

would just do a Q-and-A with me. We'll put

these in as quickly as we can.

THE COURT: All right. The

deposition of whom?

MR. PEPPER: This is a

deposition of woman called Betty Jean

Spates. We've tried for months and months to

contact her and tried to bring her to court.

It was taken on the 3rd of November, 1994.

THE COURT: Mr. Garrison, are

you familiar with this?

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, I

have the deposition here. If Dr. Pepper

wants to read it, I won't read any parts in.

I'll let the jury decide.

THE COURT: All right. Go

ahead.

MR. PEPPER: Let's turn firstly,

please, to page 11.

"Question: When you became employed

at Jim's Grill, did you work full-time like

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2106

forty hours or two days a week? How would

you describe it, the best you recall?

Answer: All I know is I was there

every day.

Question: About what time would

you go to work, if you recall?

Answer: No certain times.

Sometimes I would go at four o'clock in the

morning and stay until closing.

Question: Okay. Okay.

Answer: Not straight through. I

would leave and come back.

Question: What time usually would

closing be? What time would you usually

close?

Answer: I guess around three

o'clock in the morning.

Question: So it was almost open

twenty-four hours a day?

Answer: Yes.

Question: Now, you mentioned that

you worked some other place.

Answer: Seabrook Wallpaper.

Question: Were you working there at

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2107

the same time at these two jobs?

Answer: Yes.

Question: Did you go to work at

Seabrook's before Jim's Grill or after or

about the same time?

Answer: I don't remember.

Question: Where was Seabrook's?

Answer: 421 South Main.

Question: Where was it in relation

to Jim's Grill? Was it very close? Across

the street?

Answer: Yes, across the street.

Question: What did you do at

Seabrook's, Ms. Spates?

Answer: I was a shipping clerk.

Question: Would you have been a

full-time employee with them?

Answer: Yes, I guess so.

Question: When you worked at --

started working at Jim's grill, Ms. Spates,

did you wait on tables? Is that one of the

things did you?

Answer: Yes.

Question: Did Mr. Jowers sell

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2108

beer?

Answer: Yes.

Question: Did you serve beer to

the customers?

Answer: No.

Question: You did not. Okay. Did

you operate the cash register?

Answer: Sometimes.

Question: Okay. Did you do any

cooking?

Answer: No.

Question: Okay. Did Mr. Jowers

stay in the restaurant most of the time or

was he in and out also?

Answer: He was in and out.

Question: Okay. How many days a

week would he stay open?

Answer: Seven.

Question: Seven days. All right.

Do you recall, Ms. Spates, about what month

in 1967 or what season, if it had been summer

or fall?

Answer: In the summer.

Question: In the summer of 1967,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2109

you worked continuously on up until sometime

in the future. Is that correct?

Answer: Yes."

MR. PEPPER: Let's move to page

41, down to line 19.

"Question: I want to be sure we

know what you do remember. This is a

quotation. I vividly recall that Loyd was

once again nowhere in sight inside the grill

at about six p.m. So again I went back into

the kitchen for him. Do you remember that

statement?

Answer: I just don't remember

these times."

MR. PEPPER: Reference here is

to an affidavit that she is being questioned

on.

"Question: Okay.

Answer: Yeah, I remember saying it.

Question: Okay. Question, in

quotation marks, while I remember hearing

what sounded like a firecracker going off,

and within seconds, Loyd came running through

the back door carrying another different

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2110

rifle. Do you remember that statement?

Answer: Not exactly like that.

Question: Okay. Well, essentially

is that statement correct, what I just read

to you, the paragraph?

Answer: Would you read it again,

please?

Question: Question, quotation

marks, while there I remember hearing a sound

like a firecracker going off, and within

seconds, Loyd came running through the back

door carrying another different rifle.

Answer: Yes.

Question: Question, quotation

marks, he was white as a ghost and very

excited and wearing black trousers, a white

shirt, and a black bowtie, as usual. The gun

he was carrying had a shorter barrel than the

first one, and the handle was a darker shade

of brown. Full stop. It also had a scope

and something screwed on to the end of the

barrel.

Answer: Yes.

Question: Question, quotation

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2111

marks, he looked like a wild man. His hair

was all messed up, and he had obviously been

on his knees on the damp ground because the

knees of his trousers were wet and muddy. He

looked at me and saw me looking at him and

said words to the effect, you would never say

anything to hurt me, would you? And I said,

no, of course I wouldn't. Do you remember

that?

Answer: Yes."

MR. PEPPER: Move down to line

21.

"Question: Question, okay.

Quotation marks, only twice did he refer to

the incident, once as it happened and he saw

me watching him and then sometime later when

he said to me some words to the effect, you

would never say anything to hurt me, would

you? Do you remember that?

Answer: I don't even understand

what you just read.

Question: Let me say see if I can

get another version of it here. Okay.

Quotation marks, only twice did he refer to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2112

the incident, once as it happened and he saw

me watching him and then sometime later when

he again said to me words to the effect, you

would never say anything to hurt me, would

you?

Answer: Yes."

MR. PEPPER: Let's move on,

please, to page 46.

"Question: Question, again in

quotation marks, I finally told the details

of this story to Dr. William Pepper, the

attorney for James Earl Ray, in 1992 and was

going to testify at the HBO tele-trial of

James Earl Ray but did not testify because I

was too frightened. Is that true?

Answer: Yes.

Question: Question, speech marks,

recently I was interviewed by investigators

from the TBI -- the Tennessee Bureau of

Investigation -- who I understand have been

looking into Loyd Jowers' story at the

request of Shelby County Attorney General,

end of quotation marks. Is that true?

Answer: I really didn't understand

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2113

that.

Question: Question, recently I was

interviewed by an investigators.

Answer: Yes, that's true.

Question: Question, quotation

marks, I recall that he did not ask me what I

knew about the killing of Dr. King or what I

saw but only asked me to answer yes or no to

various statements contained in Mr. Kenneth

Herman's affidavit of 25th January, 1994.

They also asked me if I had been offered

money for my actual story. I said no.

Answer: True.

Question: Question, Mr. Herman's

statement was basically correct as to what I

saw, and I told them so. Is that true?

Answer: Yes.

Question: Question, quotation

marks, I was therefore surprised to be shown

an article in the Tennessean newspaper on

Thursday, February 10th, 1994, which stated

that the Shelby County Attorney General said

three witnesses, including myself, who had

tied Jowers to the assassination now said

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2114

nothing about Jowers' involvement, full

stop. Do you remember that? It says

Ms. Jowers, but, I'm sorry, Ms. Spates.

Answer: Yes.

Question: Question, quotation

marks, I said no such thing to the TBI

investigators and resent any statement I

did. I will not retract the truthful account

of the events which I witnessed around 6 p.m.

on Thursday, April 4, 1968, which confirm

Mr. Jowers' involvement. Is that true?

Answer: True.

Question" -- this is being quoted

again -- "I confirmed that no one has paid or

offered to pay me any money for relating what

I saw. Based on everything I know, James

Earl Ray was not the person who shot Dr.

King. Other persons have tried to get me to

change my story, saying that if I did so, I

would benefit financially. I refused to do

so and will continue to refuse. I resent any

attempt by the Attorney General or his TBI

investigators to imply that I am telling lies

for money. The story I told is actually

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2115

against my interest but nevertheless I tell

it because it is the truth, and I believe

that an innocent man is in prison. Do you

remember that statement?

Answer: That's true."

MR. PEPPER: Turn next, please,

to page 83, line 21. Redirect examination by

Mr. Garrison.

"Question, Ms. Spates, let me ask

you a couple of other things and I'll be

through. On the day before this occurred, do

you remember seeing any money in the

restaurant there or any place?

Answer: I don't know if -- yeah, I

remember seeing money.

Question: Where was the money?

Answer: It was in the stove in the

kitchen.

Question: Where was the -- tell us

where the stove was located in the kitchen.

Upon entering from the front door, would it

to be to your right or left?

Answer: The left.

Question: The stove would be to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2116

your left?

Answer: Yes.

Question: Question, when you saw

the money, Ms. Spates, did it appear to be a

lot of money or a very small amount? Would

you describe it for us?

Answer: I don't know the

denomination, but it was from the front of

the stove forward, but I don't know whether

it was all the way back lined up back there,

but it was a lot from the front.

Question: It was bills?

Answer: Yes.

Question: It wasn't coins?

Answer: No.

Question: It was bills, right.

Were they wrapped with something did it

appear, or was it all stacked up on top of

each other?

Answer: They were stacked very

neat, so I don't know.

Question: You couldn't tell the

denomination, like if they were dollar bills,

five, ten, fifteen, what they were?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2117

Answer: No.

Question: Was it a large stack of

bills?

Answer: Yes.

Question: Okay. Would it have

been say four inches, six inches, a foot?

What would be your best --

Asnwer: If this is the front of the

stove right here, it was all the way from

about the top of the stove.

Question: Was it packed up pretty

high, the money?

Answer: Yeah, from the bottom to

the top.

Question: Had you ever seen any

money before all the time you were there

before this?

Answer: Pardon?

Question: Had you ever seen any

money before this time that you noticed it?

Had you ever seen any money like that before

all the time you worked there?

Answer: No place."

MR. PEPPER: Move back, please, to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2118

page 21, line 24.

"Question: Ms. Spates, let me ask

you this: Did you and Mr. Jowers engage in a

sexual relationship during the time we're

speaking of here in 1967, 1968 and on into

the 1970's?

Answer: Yes.

Question: More than once?

Answer: Yes.

Question: Many times, you'd say?

Answer: Yes.

Question: Okay. And that would

have been at both 418 South Main and 990

Oakview is where this took place?

Answer: I'm not for sure about

Oakview.

Question: Okay. Would there have

been any other place other than 418 South

Main?

Answer: No.

Question: That would have been it

mostly?

Answer: Yes.

Question: Do you recall any other

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2119

person ever being present when you and

Mr. Jowers engaged in any type of sexual

activity?

Answer: No."

MR. PEPPER: That's all, Your

Honor. Thank you.

MR. GARRISON: I'd like to read

some other portions.

THE COURT: Are you going to

read them yourself?

MR. GARRISON: Yes.

THE COURT: All right.

MR. GARRISON: These are some

other questions that were asked of Ms. Spates

on this date when she was present giving her

testimony, beginning on page 5 with line 7.

This question was asked Ms. Spates:

"Ms. Spates, I'm Lewis Garrison, you

and I met I believe one time before this. Is

that correct?

Answer, yes.

Question: Okay. Ms. Spates, I

want to ask you some questions. If there is

anything that I ask you that you do not

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2120

understand or you want me to speak louder, if

you will tell me, I'll be glad to do it so

I'll help you understand what I'm trying to

ask you. You are here where a subpoena was

served on you. Is that correct?

Answer: Yes.

Question: You understand the

subpoena is in effect a court order for you

to appear here and give your testimony to

what you know under oath. Do you understand

that.

Answer: Yes.

Question: The same as if you were

called upon to go into court in this case and

you were in a courtroom with the same oath as

would you take then. Do you understand that?

Answer: Yes.

Question: Ms. Spates, will you

tell us your full name.

Answer: Betty Spates."

Page 7, beginning with line 9.

"Question: Ms. Spates, if I'm not

mistaken, you and I met in my office back

several months ago. Is that correct? Do you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2121

remember that you came to any office one day?

Answer: One day, but I don't

remember when.

Question: That is the only time

you and I ever met before today, am I

correct?

Answer: Yes.

Question: Let me ask you so we

can -- of course, let me remind you that you

are under oath again. To get the record

clear, when you and I met before, we never

discussed any payment to you about any kind

of statement or any facts of this case or

anything about you would make any amount of

money?

Answer: No.

Question: In fact, I never

discussed with you any money amount, amount

of money, in this case that would you be paid

or promised or anything, have I?

Answer: No."

MR. GARRISON: Skipping over to

page 25, beginning with line 14.

"Question: Let me is you ask you

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2122

something. Do you recall on that date or any

date before that date did Mr. Jowers ever

exhibit a weapon, gun, rifle, pistol or

anything like in your existence?

Answer: I can't say that -- what

now?

Question: On that day or any day

before that did Mr. Jowers ever exhibit or

show you a gun or did you see him with a gun,

pistol, rifle, anything?

Answer: Yes, I've seen him with a

gun.

Question: What kind of gun was it?

Answer: I've seen him with a

rifle. I've seen him with a pistol.

Question: Before this date of

April 4th you had seen him with one?

Answer: I really can't remember

that date. I do know I have seen him with

one since I've known him.

Question: You've seen him with a

rifle at some time since you've known him?

Answer: Yes.

Question: The rifle that you saw

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2123

him with -- the rifles you saw him with, do

you remember did they have a scope on them

where you look in?

Answer: I don't remember.

Question: Ms. Spates, on the date

of April 4, 1968, do you recall any incidents

that day, that afternoon, in the area of the

range around six p.m. where you heard

something, a noise in the back of the grill?

Answer: I can't remember the time

or whether it was that date."

MR. GARRISON: Page 27, line 2.

"Question: What did that sound

like to you?

Answer: Kind of sounded like not a

loud backfire.

Question: Where did it appear to

come from?

Answer: I have no idea.

Question: Could you tell us where

you were in the grill when it happened when

you heard the noise?

Answer: In the kitchen.

Question: Do you recall was anyone

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2124

with you?

Answer: No.

Question: You were by yourself?

Answer: Uh-huh.

Question: Where was Mr. Jowers?

Answer: I don't remember."

MR. GARRISON: Page 28,

line 4.

"Question: Do you remember,

Ms. Spates, did you see Mr. Jowers with a

gun, a rifle, at or about the time or after

the time you heard this noise that sounded

like car backfiring?

Answer: I don't remember."

Pages 31, beginning with Line 15,

question by Dr. Pepper.

"Ms. Spates, you say you were not

asked questions like this. Can you tell us

this: Did someone appear to ask you

something about this such as the questions

there?

Answer: Two TBI men came to my

house.

Question: Do you remember they

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2125

were recording what you said?

Answer: Yes.

Question: And they also wrote out

some statements and answers. Do you remember

that?

Answer: Yes.

Question: Did you read that at any

point?

Answer: No, I didn't read it.

Question: Okay. And did they ask

you to sign it?

Answer: Yes.

Question: And swear that you were

telling them what you remember about it?

Answer: Yes.

Question: Okay. Were there any

questions they asked you that you did not

understand?

Answer: No.

Question: Did you understand all

the questions they asked you?

Answer: Yes.

MR. GARRISON: On page 52,

beginning with line 19.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2126

Question: Ms. Spates, back before

the assassination of Dr. King on April the

4th, 1968, had you ever seen a gentleman

whose name was James Earl Ray?

Answer: No.

Question: Have you ever seen the

gentleman whose name is James Earl Ray?

Answer: Yes.

Question: I'm sorry?

Answer: Yes.

Question: Would you tell us when

and where you first saw James Earl Ray?

Answer: On TV.

Question: Okay. Was that the

first time you ever heard his name called?

Answer: Yes.

Question: When you saw him on TV,

did you recognize him as being someone you

had seen -- ever seen previously?

Answer: No.

Question: At any time?

Answer: No.

Question: You never -- you had

never seen him in the rooming house near

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2127

Jim's Grill, in Jim's Grill or any place

close by?

Answer: No."

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, I

have an exhibit that was taken by the

Tennessee Bureau of Investigation that I'd

like to read to the jury at this time. These

are the --

THE COURT: You may.

MR. GARRISON: -- are the

statements which were marked as an exhibit to

her testimony.

"It wasn't unusual to see Loyd with

a handgun but not a rifle. As to Kenneth

Herman's statement that I said James Earl Ray

is innocent, that is false. I have no

information that James Earl Ray is innocent

of the murder of Dr. Martin Luther King. I

also didn't see Loyd Jowers come into the

rear of Jim's Grill at six p.m. I was at

Seabrooks working when some of the girls

started crying and saying Dr. King had been

shot. I ran across the street to Jim's Grill

to be with my sister Bobbie. The policemen

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2128

came in and told us to go to the kitchen area

of the grill. We were locked in the grill

for about an hour with other patrons. Maybe

a week before the murder of Dr. King, my

Sister Alta showed me a lot of money in the

kitchen of Jim's Grill in a broken stove. We

were going to get some, but Loyd put a German

Shepherd in the back there so we couldn't get

it.

Question: Ms. Eldridge" -- this is

Ms. Spates Eldridge -- "are you familiar with

William Pepper, Kenneth Herman, Loyd Jowers

and Wayne Chastain?

Answer: Yes, all except Wayne

Chastain. Originally I lost my job at the

Arcade Restaurant due to the publicity

continued coming from the death of Dr. Martin

Luther King. I did not see Loyd Jowers come

in the rear -- into the restaurant on 4/4/68

with a rifle or gun of any kind around six

p.m. I did see him come in the grill between

eleven and twelve noon on that day. I went

over there to talk to my sister Bobbie. I

was a shipping clerk at Seabrook. From

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2129

eleven a.m. to three p.m. I did see Loyd come

into the rear of the grill with a rifle. I

asked him what he was going to do with the

rifle.

Who wanted you to say he saw Loyd on

4/4/68 with a rifle at six p.m. rather than

between eleven and twelve noon which you say

is noon?

Kenneth Herman, Loyd Jowers,

reporters from London.

Who did you work with at Seabrook?

Answer: I don't remember any

names.

Do you have any recollection of

meeting or seeing James Earl Ray at Seabrook

buying wrapping paper on 4/4/94?

No.

Do you have any information to offer

which may reveal James Earl Ray is innocent

of the murder of Dr. King?

No.

Did you give your mother or your

brother, Essie White, a rifle to keep for you

which may or may not have been used to kill

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2130

Dr. King which you got from Loyd Jowers?

No."

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, I'd

like to have this marked as an exhibit.

(The above-mentioned document

was marked Exhibit 39.)

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor --

THE COURT: Yes.

MR. PEPPER: -- Plaintiffs would

like to move into evidence the entire text of

the deposition.

THE COURT: All right. Anything

further?

MR. PEPPER: No, Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right --

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor,

there is a matter I want to take up out of

the presence of the jury for a moment.

THE COURT: Oh, okay. Ladies

and gentlemen, there a matter that the

lawyers want to discuss, and it would be

improper for you to hear that discussion. So

would you please --

(Jury out.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2131

(Short recess.)

THE COURT: Mr. Garrison.

MR. GARRISON: If Your Honor

please, at this time we've completed all the

testimony and proof, and I'd like to move the

Court to take some action on this matter.

If Your Honor please, first of all,

I'd like to renew my motion yesterday for

mistrial. If my client had been here, he

would be testifying at this point. He is not

here because he is not able.

Also, if Your Honor please, I'm

moving for directed verdict in the case based

on three grounds. First of all, there has

been no proof of any damages at all. There

has been no proof anyone has been damaged.

There is no pain and suffering, nothing as

far as damages.

Secondly, if Your Honor please, as

to whether my client, Mr. Jowers, was

involved in the conspiracy, as Your Honor may

recall, three weeks ago yesterday you read to

the jury what a conspiracy consisted of.

There has been no proof that he was involved

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2132

in a conspiracy here.

Thirdly, if Your Honor please, we've

alleged in our defense to begin with, which

has been known for a long time, that the

statute of limitations expired on this case.

I've given Your Honor several cases here that

I think are applicable, and certainly in this

case the statute of limitations would have

expired long before the suit was filed.

Your Honor, to go back over this

matter, as far as the damages are concerned,

there has been no proof that anyone was

damaged in any way. There has been no

conscious pain and suffering, no expenses,

there has been no anything that has been

proven as far as damages in the case.

Secondly, the only thing Mr. Jowers

has been accused of is taking in a box and

taking in some money and coming out the back

door, which now the witness has refuted and

said shes didn't say that. There has only

been one witness.

Even Mr. King, when he testified,

and also the other witness, said that Mr.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2133

Jowers simply said I did what I had done

previously that. That was to take in some

money from Mr. Liberto which I had done

previously. He said, I had no knowledge that

this would be to assassinate Dr. King. He

said, I had done this before. He said they

told me simply I would have a box that would

be delivered. I didn't know what it was. It

didn't say what it was on the box. I simply

took it and was told to be at the back door,

not knowing what I would be given, but he

said, I was given a gun. According to his

statement, it was smoking.

If Your Honor please, he might be

guilty of perhaps not reporting a crime, but

that's after the fact. Here we are where he

is charged with conspiracy, and there is

nothing to indicate that he was part of any

plan to assassinate Dr. King in any

conspiracy. There is nothing to indicate he

took any action in that regard knowingly,

that he was knowingly taking any action as

part of the conspiracy to bring about the

assassination of Dr. King.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2134

There has been no proof offered at

all that he had done anything except what he

had done previously, take in some money from

Mr. Liberto, according to him, which he had

done previously, also, that a box would be

brought into his place, not knowing what it

was for, what it would be used for, not

knowing what was in the box. He was told to

be at the back door and accept something, and

that is all that has been offered here to

Court.

If Your Honor please, as far as the

statute of limitations is concerned, way back

in 1993 Mr. Jowers was questioned by all of

the newspapers, television, Prime Time, and

certainly back then it was known whatever his

involvement was, what he claimed was his

involvement, which I just stated is all that

he has ever said.

Now, if Your Honor please, there are

numerous cases which I've cited here that

certainly would indicate this case would bar

the statute of limitations. Mr. King and

Ambassador Young said they met with

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2135

Mr. Jowers but they never stated the dates

which would bring it within the one year.

Even if they didn't know it until then, they

never told this jury the dates they met with

Mr. Jowers.

Even assuming that they had no

knowledge of Mr. Jowers' involvement, up

until that point they would have had to say

they met with him on a certain date and we

filed suit within twelve months, because

that's what the cases say. Certainly, if

Your Honor please, there has been no proof to

that effect.

Mr. King has testified that he met

with Mr. Jowers twice, but he didn't state

the dates. He didn't say, we made some

reasonable effort to discover what

Mr. Jowers' involvement was in this case.

There has been no proof as to that.

If Your Honor please, in addition to

what I've already given you is another case

of Gosnell versus National Chemical, which is

cited as 674 Southwest 2nd 26 Series. The

Supreme Court says, "We point out that this

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2136

finding," which they had previously said the

one year rule applies to wrongful death

statute, "has no bearing on the burden of

proof at trial which in this case would

require the plaintiff to prove that she acted

with reasonable diligence to discover what

had happened."

So, if Your Honor please, there has

been absolutely no proof here at all that

anything was done to discover what

Mr. Jowers' involvement was, if any, in this

case.

Based upon all the testimony the

Court has heard here and the jury has heard,

there is no way in the world that they could

even presume that the suit was filed within

the statute of limitations period, even if

you go back to 1993.

The case that I cited, your Honor,

Brasswell versus Carruthers, the Court holds

very stiffly that the one-year statute of

limitations for personal injury claims

alleged applies to a suit alleging

conspiracy.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2137

If Your Honor please, in this case

with what testimony there has been, there was

been no proof of damages, no proof of

conspiracy, there has been no proof that

there is any effort made to discover anything

that Mr. Jowers did or had any part in this.

There has been no explanation as to what

efforts were made, which certainly the

plaintiff would have had the burden to do.

I think, if Your Honor please, there

should be a directed verdict for the

defendant.

THE COURT: Mr. Pepper.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you, Your

Honor. As is the case with the Court, the

plaintiffs have just been hit with this

motion virtually at the midnight hour. It

seems that defendant is determined at all

costs to keep this matter from going to a

jury and the facts of the case from being

decided by a jury after all the proof has

been in.

With respect to the damages issue,

your Honor, three members of the King family

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2138

have testified before this Court, and they

have testified in clear language as to what

the loss of Martin King as a husband and a

father meant to them as a family. It should

not be incumbent upon that family to appear

here and justify the pain and suffering that

they have felt all of these years. I submit

respectfully --

THE COURT: Let me ask you

this: Was there not a stipulation as to the

damages?

MR. PEPPER: That's what I

thought we had agreed, Your Honor. And the

damages that Dexter King testifying to as

having accepted following our stipulation was

that the family would seek only one hundred

dollars as a payment against the funeral

expenses. That was an actual dollar amount.

I don't think the family should be

held to task for not wanting to receive a

large sum of money from the jury in this

case. There was that agreement. And we had

agreed -- I thought we had agreed that there

was a hundred dollars as a funeral expense

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2139

offset.

If it please the Court, your Honor,

I respectfully disagree with my colleague.

There has been such an overwhelming amount of

evidence in this case as to the involvement

of the defendant in a conspiracy that the

only reason that plaintiffs have not moved

for a directed verdict is because plaintiff

wished these issues to go before a jury and

wished to have a jury verdict as opposed to

imposing that burden upon the Court.

We submit that the testimony and the

evidence that has been supplied to this Court

and jury is overwhelming indicates and a

conspiracy. It is form the defendant's own

mouth, it has come from his own mouth and his

own experiences and his own admissions that

are now in evidence here. His admissions at

various times clearly indicated he was

involved. He has admitted being involved,

although he has said he was unknowingly

involved in what was going on. Plaintiffs

have testified, provided evidence, that that

is simply not credible, Your Honor.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2140

With respect to the statute of

limitations issue, your Honor, in evidence is

the tape of the meeting. It was put into

evidence and it was testified to here by

Ambassador Young and Dexter King. And very

clearly on this tape, your Honor, is the date

of that meeting which has been before this

Court from the time that this has been

admitted in evidence. The date is the 2nd of

March, 1998.

If it please the Court, this action

was filed on the 2nd of October, 1998, which

is well within the one-year statute of

limitations.

Your Honor, plaintiffs maintain that

it was not until the meeting that took place

between the defendant and Ambassador Young

and Dexter King that they concretely knew,

had notice, that this man was involved.

Yes, there were rumors. There were

reports. But the plaintiffs sought a meeting

with the defendant in order to clarify this

issue. They sought and sought that meeting,

and finally that meeting came about on the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2141

2nd of March, 1998. It was not that they

didn't try, that they didn't attempt to learn

as a matter of their own concern and

understanding as to what happened, but they

were not able to have that meeting until the

2nd of March, and the action then was filed

in the succeeding October.

So plaintiffs submit that it was

only at that point in time that they really

did know about it.

Further on the issue of the statute

of limitation, your Honor, in the case of

Steve Realty versus Ovaso, 823 Southwest 2nd,

195 Tennessee, 1991, Judge Lanier ruled that

the statute of limitations has to be pleaded

in the proper time and manner, and if it is

not raised in the proper time and manner, it

can be deemed at the discretion of the Court

to have been waived and it could not be

relied upon by the defendants.

We submit, your Honor, that this is

not the proper time and manner for this issue

to have been raised as we are about to close

and go to a jury, and it is a matter of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2142

discretion for the Court as to whether or not

the Court will allow it.

In Kakamecee (Phonetic) versus

Thurmond, 282 Southwest 2nd, 633, the Court

in that indication also refused to allow the

statute of limitations being applied because

it did not do so with promptness.

Your Honor, in such a case a state

out of limitations cannot be used for

dismissal unless it is clearly -- clearly --

within the Court's discretion to exercise

it. In the Gosnell case that was cited by

the defendant, the Court actually held

"Reasonable care and diligence in

discovering a compensability injury is a

question of fact for the jury unless under

the facts in the light most favorable to the

appellant there exists no genuine issue of

fact."

So even in the case of Gosnell this

matter -- the statute of limitations is a

matter for the Court, and I would

respectfully submit, your Honor, that

plaintiffs have come well within it.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2143

So on the issue of damages, your

Honor, I think that has been agreed to. It

has been stipulated.

And the issue of conspiracy, I think

the overwhelming amount of evidence even from

the defendant himself indicates that he was

involved in the conspiracy. The extent of

the involvement is admittedly something to be

determined yet.

And in the case of the statute of

limitations, Your Honor, it is entirely in

your discretion. In our view it is out of

time and should not be raised at this

moment.

We respectfully request that Your

Honor allow this case to go to the jury,

which is where we've been heading from the

first day.

Thank you.

THE COURT: Let me ask you, who

initiated the meeting between Mr. Jowers and

the Kings? Can anyone answer that for me?

MR. PEPPER: I'm sorry, Your

Honor?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2144

THE COURT: Who initiated the

meeting between the King Kings and Jowers,

and Mr. Jowers?

MR. PEPPER: Plaintiffs had been

wanting this meeting for quite a period of

time and had attempted through defendant's

counsel to cause the meeting to take place.

But for various logistical reasons on both

sides the date that it finally took place was

the 2nd of March, 1998.

MR. PEPPER: Your Honor.

MR. GARRISON: Your Honor, let

me say this in response to Dr. Pepper: There

has to be some proof from the witness stand

that the plaintiffs have taken some steps to

reasonably discover the cause of action.

This happened thirty-one years ago. In the

first response we filed to this lawsuit

months and months ago, we set out that this

lawsuit is barred by the statute of

limitations.

Of course, it is -- the plaintiff

has the burden of moving that they either

filed it within the time or that they used

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2145

reasonable diligence in discovery that they

had a cause of action. Now, your Honor,

anyone that watches the news and reads the

newspaper in this country knows that back in

1993 Mr. Jowers was on Prime Time and made

certain allegations.

Even then, if Your Honor please, the

only thing he ever said was, I took in some

money from Mr. Liberto, which I had done

previously, he told me he would be sending a

package, I didn't know what it was, didn't

have anything on the box, and that he told me

to be at the back door.

Your Honor, is that evidence of

conspiracy? And "unknowingly" is not enough

according to the law. The law says that a

person has to knowingly be part of a

conspiracy, that they take some activity in

it and the act be carried out.

Here in this case he says he

unknowingly did the things he did previously

for Mr. Liberto, and that was to take in some

money for him. He said he handled money many

times previously.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2146

Now, if Your Honor please, I don't

think there is anything close to what we

would think of that would require a person to

be charged and held liable for a conspiracy.

There has to be some proof from the witness

stand as far as the statute of limitations

that the plaintiffs have taken due diligence

or exercised due diligence in trying to find

out if they have a cause of action. There

has been no proof here.

The only thing Mr. King said -- I

respect Mr. King and love him dearly -- was

that we met with Mr. Jowers. There is no

indication of time. There was no indication

that they had tried to meet with him

earlier.

In fact, Mr. King did meet with

Mr. Jowers earlier, months earlier. He knew

it then. That was long before, if Your Honor

please, as to what Mr. Jowers' statement was

to him about his involvement.

If the Court please, as this Gosnell

case says, the plaintiff has the burden of

proving that they filed it within the time or

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2147

took reasonable steps to discover. There is

no proof here. There is no jury question

because there is no proof for the jury to

decide that they took reasonable steps.

In fact, if Your Honor please, I

think certainly I don't believe that Mr. King

or Ms. King or the family were lying to the

fact that Mr. Jowers had come forth. It was

all in the news media. Everybody I guess in

the whole country knew, around the world, as

far as that goes, that he had made some

statement.

At that time would have been the

time to investigate it, not years later. At

this point, if Your Honor please, it is too

late. As I say, we alleged this in our first

defense in this lawsuit months ago.

There is no proof here of damages

because we had an agreement that if the

funeral bill was presented, but it wasn't

presented. They've done nothing to prove

damages, if Your Honor please.

I think without question, if Your

Honor please, that the suit should be

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2148

dismissed and the jury directed to find a

verdict for the defendant. The statute of

limitations has expired. There has been no

proof of damages. There has been no proof,

if Your Honor please, that Mr. Jowers was

involved in a conspiracy.

I can't think of anyone's testimony

that would qualify him to be a part of a

conspiracy knowingly. Even if you put him in

the light of best thing that the plaintiff

has to offer, there is no proof of a

conspiracy.

MR. PEPPER: If we had known we

were to provide a funeral bill for the cost

of the funeral of Martin Luther King, then we

would have done that, if that was required.

We didn't think this was required. We

thought it was agreed that there would be a

hundred dollar damage claim as an offset as

to what that bill was. So I think that takes

care of the damages issue.

In terms of conspiracy, the evidence

I think bears out in this case that

Mr. Jowers has said, and he said in the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2149

meeting with Ambassador Young and Mr. King,

that he knew somebody was going to be

killed. I didn't know who was going to be

killed. He knew something clearly illegal

was going on and he was a part of it.

What he has attempted to say is he

didn't know it was going to be Martin Luther

King. Both Ambassador Young and Dexter King

found that not believable and so testified on

the stand here.

With respect to the statute of

limitations, it is within the sound

discretion of this Court. But that is a real

issue. If that has been a viable issue, what

are we doing here for four weeks arguing in

case? Why wasn't that issue argued at the

very beginning, save the State of Tennessee

and the plaintiffs and everyone else

concerned with this all of the costs that

these proceedings have cost, not to mention

the time that this jury has had to put in and

the disruption of their personal lives?

That's when this issue should have

been raised if it is a real issue and not an

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2150

afterthought as we're about to go to the jury

and let them decide. I submit it is within

Your Honor's discretion to rule on that issue

as well.

MR. GARRISON: I'll say one

more thing and close as to the issue the

defendant can raise an issue of defense at

any point during the trial. It was the

burden to prove this on the part of the

plaintiff. There has been no proof as far as

the statute of limitations. So a point of

defense, such as statute of limitations, can

be raised at any point during the trial.

- at this point we choose to raise

it because there had been no proof. If there

had been some proof regarding it, that would

be a moot question. There has been no proof

regarding it such that the plaintiffs have

took proper steps to determine they had a

claim against Mr. Jowers.

If Your Honor please, from what Your

Honor has heard in this case and from the

proof on the witness stand, there is none.

There is nothing. There is nothing the jury

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2151

can decide as far as the statute of

limitations.

THE COURT: All right. As far

as the mistrial is concerned, I'll reaffirm

my judgment on that and deny the motion.

On the issue of damages, as I

recall, we had a meeting in my chambers where

we discussed damages, and I thought that the

parties had agreed and were going to

stipulate that if the jury reached a verdict

in favor of the plaintiffs, that the

plaintiffs were not attempting to recover a

lot of money out of this suit and it was

their purpose to have the truth come out and

to be sanctified, more or less, by a jury

verdict and that the plaintiffs were only

seeking nominal damages.

Pursuant to that discussion, the

plaintiffs presented proof that they were

asking not for the complete funeral expenses

but for something nominal, in the area of a

hundred dollars, as I recall, and that they

didn't even intend to retain that but that

they were going to share that with some

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2152

charity. I believe that was the testimony.

As far as the damage question is

concerned, then I believe there was some

proof of damages in the case. Plaintiffs

made it very clear that they didn't intend to

recover all of the damages, that they could

never recover from the emotional distress and

all the pain and suffering that they have

experienced, but in the course of the

necessity to prove some damages, that they

were only going to ask for nominal damages in

the case.

As for the conspiracy, as I recall

the testimony, Mr. Jowers himself said that

he knew that something was going on and that

it was illegal and that he owed Mr. Liberto a

favor and that he would have done anything to

satisfy his obligation to Mr. Liberto, even

if it required him to do something more than

just hold money and receive a rifle.

I believe that the proof in this

case is overwhelming that he was aware that

some illegal action was going to be

committed. Under our theory of conspiracy,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2153

it is not necessary that he knows to whom the

damage is going to be invoked. As long as he

is a part of the scheme and knowingly

participates and it causes injury to anyone,

he would then be a part of that conspiracy.

Now, of course, I don't -- it is not

that I consider Judge Lanier an authority on

the question of statute of limitations, but I

think long before when the argument first

began I had written "waiver" on my notes,

because, as I recall, this is the first time

that the statute -- the question of the

statute of limitations has been raised before

me, and there has been too much invested in

this case to wait until the eleventh hour to

raise that issue.

Additionally, I believe it is -- the

statute of limitations is the kind of defense

that is the burden of the defendant to prove,

not the plaintiff, and I don't -- if this

original interview by the Kings and

Mr. Jowers, if it was -- if it occurred at a

time which would invoke the statute of

limitations, that would have been the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2154

defendant's duty to prove.

I believe that at this point, after

all of the proof is in, that the statute of

limitations, even though -- not even deciding

whether or not it was a legitimate defense, I

believe that it is improperly raised at this

time.

For all of these reasons, I'm going

to deny the motions. We will go ahead with

our arguments and our instructions and jury

deliberations.

It is a quarter to four now. It is

convenient for the jury to hear the argument

and then immediately hear the instructions.

It is also a disadvantage if one party argues

today and then tomorrow the next party argues

and the jury will have forgotten the first

one and the second one is the one that he was

heavily on their mind.

I hate to put it off until

tomorrow. I think maybe we ought to -- I

don't know what the jurors' plans are, but I

would like to know whether or not they have

any commitments that would prevent them from

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2155

sitting through this process, which would

probably keep us until an ungodly hour

tonight if we would go into it, but I think

I'm going to consult with them and see

whether or not we should go on with this

process this evening or whether we should

stop now and just start freshly in the

morning.

Mr. James, would you please bring

the jury out.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: Ladies and

gentlemen, since we're going to be here until

midnight, we were wondering if you wanted

pizza or barbecue.

We have completed the proof in this

case, and it is now time for the arguments of

the attorneys for the parties. They are

going to tell you, remind you, of what they

think the proof has shown and what they think

your verdict should be. The plaintiff has

the first opportunity to argue, and then the

defendant follows the plaintiff. And the

plaintiff then has an opportunity to respond

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2156

to the defendant's argument. But that's the

end. It doesn't just keep going like that.

Once the arguments are complete,

then I'll give you your instructions, and you

will begin your deliberations.

Now, the parties would prefer that

you hear their arguments, get my instructions

and go right into your deliberations before

you forget the arguments and the

instructions.

We can do that one of two ways: We

can either go ahead with it until we complete

it tonight, or we can just stop now and get

into in the morning and make it a continuous

process.

I don't know whether any of you have

children in daycare or what your problems

are, if you have any problems at all. So my

question to you is if there is anything that

would prevent you from going on this evening,

or you would rather go home, come back

tomorrow morning? We want to accommodate

you. We also want to get it over with.

Do you all want to go back to the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2157

jury room? I'll give you five minutes if you

want to go back and discuss it.

A JUROR: Do you mind if we just

have five minutes?

THE COURT: Fine.

A JUROR: Thank you.

(Jury out.)

(Three-minute recess.)

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: What say ye?

THE JURY: (Unanimously)

Tomorrow.

THE COURT: That sounds

unanimous. All right. Let me suggest this:

Tomorrow we start hearing divorces at nine

o'clock. We'll transfer our divorces to

another division and we'll just get started

on this at nine o'clock, if that's all

right.

THE JURY: That's fine.

THE COURT: Very well, then.

Mr. James.

(The proceedings were adjourned

at 3:58 P.M.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2158

IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF SHELBY COUNTY,

TENNESSEE FOR THE THIRTIETH JUDICIAL

DISTRICT AT MEMPHIS

_______________________________________________

CORETTA SCOTT KING, et al,

Plaintiffs,

Vs. Case No. 97242

LOYD JOWERS, et al,

Defendants.

_______________________________________________

PROCEEDINGS

December 8th, 1999

VOLUME XIV

_______________________________________________

Before the Honorable James E. Swearengen,

Division 4, judge presiding.

_______________________________________________

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI,

RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

COURT REPORTERS

Suite 2200, One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

(901) 529-1999

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2159

- APPEARANCES -

For the Plaintiff: DR. WILLIAM PEPPER

Attorney at Law

New York City, New York

For the Defendant:

MR. LEWIS GARRISON

Attorney at Law

Memphis, Tennessee

Court Reported by:

MR. BRIAN F. DOMINSKI

Certificate of Merit

Registered Professional

Reporter

Daniel, Dillinger,

Dominski, Richberger &

Weatherford

22nd Floor

One Commerce Square

Memphis, Tennessee 38103

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2160

PROCEEDINGS

(9:50 A.M.)

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: Good morning, ladies

and gentlemen. We've got two more

depositions that we're going to -- no. As I

promised you, we're going into the arguments

of counsel, and then you'll get your

instructions.

As I indicated to you earlier, the

plaintiff would give his summary first. The

defendant then would give his version, and

then the plaintiff is allowed an opportunity

to respond to the defendant's arguments.

Mr. Pepper, you may proceed.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you, Your

Honor. Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.

Let me right at the out set thank you for

your attention throughout these proceedings,

long and sometimes tedious though they may

have been. We're very grateful for your

sitting here and listening to the variety of

evidence that you have heard.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2161

Your Honor will charge you on the

various aspects of evidence that you heard.

You know you've heard a great deal of

testimony here. You also have available to

you a great number of exhibits that are

attached to the testimony that you have

heard.

We urge you to at any point require

these exhibits to be brought to you so that

you can read them and consider them at

length. All the testimony, the various

levels of credibility that you describe, his

Honor will charge you with that, but it is

really down to you at the end of the day as

to how much you believe the various people

who sat in that chair there and who told you

things.

The media is very quick and prompt

to say and yell out that such and such is

hearsay, second-hand accounts, third-hand

accounts. But the media is unable to tell

you, of course, what the law is with respect

to hearsay evidence.

They think because something is

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2162

hearsay, a person is saying what another

person has said, that it is not to be

regarded, it is to be dismissed. In actual

fact, ladies and gentlemen, if a witness is

giving you hearsay but the hearsay statement

is from a person who is speaking against his

own interest, saying something that could put

him in jail in the case of the defendant

here, could have him indicted, then that is

to be taken very seriously. It is admissible

because of that exception. There are a range

of other exceptions why you can consider

hearsay.

Now, it is my job, my role here this

morning, to summarize the plaintiffs' case.

It is a case that is divided really into nine

sections. In the course of presenting that

case to you, we've taken witnesses out of

order simply because they have come from

various parts of the country and the world.

We've had problems with schedules. So at one

time you would hear a witness talking to you

about a rifle, a murder weapon in evidence,

then another time you would hear a witness

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2163

talking about a crime scene, and we had

already gone over that.

So it is difficult for you sometimes

perhaps to put all those pieces together in

an orderly fashion. That's really what I

have to do. I have to try to do that. I

have to set it out so that you can see how

this case folds together.

I'm going to try to work with you on

that this morning and try to help you

understand it as best I can. Plaintiffs'

case began with a section that dealt with the

background, the background of all of this,

why you are here, why Martin King was

assassinated, why he came to Memphis before

he was assassinated. So it dealt with the

background.

Then we moved with a second area

concerned which was local conspiracy we

called it, what was happening here in

Memphis, what events were going on that

constituted conspiracy, legally civil

conspiracy under the law. Because that's

really what we are asking you to find is that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2164

there was a conspiracy here.

Thirdly, we dealt with the crime

scene. What was this crime scene all about.

Where was the crime scene? What happened

there?

Fourthly, we went into the rifle.

This is the murder weapon. We discussed the

murder weapon and asked you to consider all

the evidence with respect to the murder

weapon. We move next to a shadowy figure

called Raul. Who is this man who was

claimed to have been James Earl Ray's

controller and the role that he played in

this case?

Then we move beyond that to what we

have called a broader conspiracy beyond

Memphis that reached into the higher levels

of the government of the United States and

some of its agents and officials. We moved

through that with you.

We went beyond that, then, into

really what amounts to a cover up. What was

the cover-up activity and why was it

important and why have these events been

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2165

shielded from public view so that only you,

you twelve, fourteen, here day after day, and

his Honor, alone perhaps in this broad land,

have heard this evidence.

How could that be, a case as

important as this? How could that be? But

it has been the case. Then we considered the

defendant's admissions, the defendant -- the

named defendant in this case, his actual

admissions, against his own interest and what

is in evidence with respect to that.

We moved lastly really to the area

of damages. And there was a fair amount of

testimony on damages from the members of the

family with respect to what they were looking

for and what their perspective was in terms

of any kind of remuneration for the loss that

they have suffered.

So that's the outline. Now let's

look at each of those sections, if we can.

First the background. Martin King, as you

know, for many years was a Baptist preacher

in the southern part of this country, and he

was thrust into leadership of the civil

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2166

rights movement at a historic moment in the

civil rights movement and social change

movement in this part of the country. That's

where he was. That's where he has been

locked in time, locked in a media image,

locked as an icon in the brains of the people

of this country.

But Martin King had moved well

beyond that. When he was awarded the Noble

Peace Prize he became in the mid-1960's an

international figure, a person of serious

stature whose voice, his opinions, on other

issues than just the plight of black people

in the South became very significant

world-wide. He commanded world-wide

attention as few had before him. As a

successor, if you will, to Mahatmas Gandi in

terms of the movement for social change

through civil disobedience. So that's where

he was moving.

Then in 1967, April 4, 1967, one

year to the day before he was killed, he

delivered the momentous speech at Riverside

Church in New York where he opposed the war.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2167

Now, he thought carefully about this war. He

had been inclined to oppose it for quite a

long period of time. Prior to that, two,

three years prior to that he had uneasy

feelings.

I remember vividly, I was a

journalist in Vietnam, when I came back he

asked to meet with me, and when I opened my

files to him, which were devastating in terms

of the effects upon the civilian population

of that country, he unashamedly wept.

I knew at that point really that the

die was cast. This was in February of 1967.

He was definitely going to oppose that war

with every strength, every fiber in his body.

And he did so. He opposed it. And from the

date of the Riverside speech to the date he

was killed, he never wavered in that

opposition.

Now, what does that mean? Is he an

enemy of the State? The State regarded him

as an enemy because he opposed it. But what

does it really mean, his opposition? I put

it to you that his opposition to that war had

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2168

little to do with ideology, with capitalism,

with democracy. It had to do with money. It

had to do with huge amounts of money that

that war was generating to large

multinational corporations that were based in

the United States, corporations that were

based in the United States.

When Martin King opposed the war,

when he rallied people to oppose the war, he

was threatening the bottom lines of some of

the largest defense contractors in this

country. This was about money. When he

threatened to bring that war to a close

through massive popular opposition, he was

threatening the bottom lines of some of the

largest construction companies, one of which

was in the State of Texas, that patronized

the Presidency of Lyndon Johnson and had the

major construction contracts at Cam Ran Bay

in Vietnam. This is what Martin King was

challenging. He was challenging the weapons

industry, the hardware, the armament

industries, that all would lose as a result

of the end of the war.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2169

Forget about democracy, forget about

any ideology. This opposition to Martin

King, this growing enmity to him, was based

on money and the loss of money. The second

aspect of his work that also dealt with money

that caused a great deal of consternation in

the circles of power in this land had to do

with his commitment to take a massive group

of people to Washington and there to encamp

them in the shadow of the Washington memorial

for as long as it took. For as long as it

took, they would make daily trips to the

halls of Congress and they would try to

compel the Congress to act, as they had

previously acted in terms of civil rights

legislation, now to act in terms of social

legislation.

Now, he begin to talk about a

redistribution of wealth, in this the

wealthiest country in the world that had such

a large group of poor people, of people

living then and now, by the way, in poverty.

That problem had to be addressed. And it

wasn't a black-and-white problem. This was a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2170

problem that dealt with Hispanics, and it

dealt with poor whites as well. That is what

he was taking on. That's what he was

challenging.

The powers in this land believed he

would not be successful. Why did they

believe that? They believed that because

they knew that the decision-making processes

in the United States had by that point in

time, and today it is much worse in my view,

but by that point in time had so consolidated

power that they were the representatives, the

foot soldiers, of the economic -- the very

economic interests who were going to suffer

as a result of these times of changes. So

the very powerful lobbying forces that put

their people in the halls of Congress and

indeed in the White House itself and

controlled them, paid and bought them and

controlled them, were certainly not going to

agree to the type of social legislation that

Martin King and his mass of humanity were

going to require.

So there was a fear. What happens

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2171

when they are frustrated? What happens when

they don't get any satisfaction? What would

happen? They feared, the military feared,

that there would be a violent rebellion in

the nation's capital. And they didn't have

the troops that could contain half a million

angry poor alienated Americans. They didn't

have the troops. Westmorland wanted another

two hundred thousand in Vietnam. They didn't

have them to give to him. They didn't have

them.

They were afraid that mob would

overrun the capital. They were afraid that

what Mr. Jefferson had urged many, many

times, that the body politic can only be

cleansed by a revolution every twenty years.

They were afraid that Mr. Jefferson would be

listened to and that that revolution would

take place.

Because of that, those factors,

Martin King was not going to be allowed, not

going to be allowed to bring that group of

people to Washington. So that's the reason

for the hostility. He saw Memphis as part

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2172

and parcel of the overall problem, as a

microcosm. He saw the plight of the garbage

workers here as being symptomatic of the

pervasive sickness of American society.

So he said if we turn our backs on

these ones, how can we go on behalf of the

broad national interests? These ones need us

now, let's start the Poor People's Campaign

here, which is what he did.

So he came to Memphis and he was

here on the 17th and 18th of March and he

spoke and he returned again on the 28th of

March and the march turned nasty.

Indications are there that there were

provocateurs, that it was broken up

deliberately, that he was discredited because

of that, and he had to then return.

And so he did plan to come back.

There was opposition within his own

organization. But he said, no, we're going

to do this and we're going to lead a peaceful

march and this is the way we're going to

launch this campaign, and so he came back to

Memphis. After the 28th he came back on the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2173

3rd of April.

Now we move to the local conspiracy

that related to the death of Martin Luther

King. You've heard evidence of a very

reputable forty-year-in-business store owner

sit up there and tell you that he always

bought -- every Thursday he went to Frank

Liberto's warehouse, that was his last stop

before he went back to Somerville, and on

that Thursday, April 4, he heard the owner of

that place take the telephone and scream into

it, "Shoot the son-of-a-bitch when he comes

on the balcony," amongst other things. That

is the first indication of the involvement of

a Mr. Frank Liberto, which information was

given to the police and the FBI and forgotten

about.

Then you've heard two other

independent witnesses testify at different

ends of the trial, one called as a witness by

the defense, Mrs. Lavada Addison, who had

this conversation with Mr. Liberto in her

cafe when Liberto leaned over the table at a

time when the Select Committee hearings were

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2174

on, apparently something came on the

television, and whispered to Mrs. Addison,

"I arranged to have Martin Luther King

killed." She jumped back and was shocked by

this. So.

Liberto puts himself in it against

his own interest, mind you. He has said

that. You are entitled to believe that.

Then comes Mrs. Lavada Addison's son

Nathan, who confronts Liberto, and Liberto

again confirms the same thing to him. So we

see now Mr. Frank Liberto's involvement in

this whole scenario.

Then we have from the defendant

himself in sessions that are before you and

you've heard testimony from Ambassador Young

and Mr. King about how he was approached and

he was asked to assist or become involved in

this assassination again by Mr. Liberto and

how he was told that he would be visited by a

man called Raul, he would first receive some

money, be visited by a man called Raul, he

would pass the money to Raul, he would

receive a gun, that he was be asked to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2175

participate in this endeavor and he should

not worry because there would be no police

around, the police would not be there.

We've heard him say that in fact he

did these things and that he received the gun

after the shooting. He said he received the

gun right at his back door. That's as far as

he went in his admissions. Of course, he

also said he didn't know what was going on.

Neither Ambassador Young nor Mr. King

believed him in that respect, that he didn't

know what was going on.

Now, why would anyone say this? Is

this something new? No. You heard testimony

from witnesses who indicated that Mr. Jowers

had said this to them years ago, as much as

twenty years ago he had said this, he had

said that he knew how Martin Luther King was

killed. He had indicated to them that he

didn't do it but he knew how it was done, and

in one case he actually told the same story

way back then that he is telling now.

So this is not some afterthought

from Mr. Jowers to try to make a movie or

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2176

become -- have notoriety or something like

that. This is a consistent story that has

been around for a long time, and other

witnesses from previous times have confirmed

it.

So other indications of the local

conspiracy, what are they? You've heard

about the removal of Detective Redditt, who

was a police officer on surveillance duty on

the afternoon. He was removed within an hour

of the killing and told there was a threat on

his life and he was sent home to arrive at

his home at the time of the assassination,

never to hear about this threat again. This

was a phony threat. I think it became quite

clear. They didn't trust him because when

been a community relations officer that had

been secunded into intelligence and at the

last minute had to pull him off, he might

have seen something, done something that was

untrustworthy. He was pulled off. The other

officer remained making notes of what he

saw.

There were two black firemen, the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2177

only two black firemen in the fire station,

they were removed. They were given orders

the night before not to report for duty but

to go to another fire station in each case

where they were surplussed to requirements.

Why were they removed? Why were those two

black firemen removed, the only two black

firemen, and the night before?

You heard the Jerry Williams,

Captain Williams, testified that he had

always formed an elite black homicide group

of detectives as a bodyguard for Dr. King.

The last visit, he was not asked to form that

bodyguard. This was the only time he was not

asked to form that bodyguard, and he didn't

know why he was not asked to form that

bodyguard. And that troubled him.

You heard that the police were at

one point around the Lorraine Motel and then

they were removed, or they just disappeared.

They disappeared within a half hour,

forty-five minutes of the killing. Why did

they disappear? Where did they go?

You saw evidence that the Invaders,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2178

a local community-organizing group that had

been willing to work with Dr. King toward the

end and were there for the purpose of helping

him produce a peaceful march, at ten minutes

to six, eleven minutes before the actual

shooting, they left the motel. They were

ordered to leave the motel. They were told

their bills were no longer going to be paid

and they had to leave the hotel. So they

emptied out. They might have reacted

violently and caused some sort of

conflagration at the hotel, but they didn't.

They just left.

You heard about the removal of the

emergency tact forces. This is the emergency

tact forces, in this case it was Tact 10,

which was usually a group of four or five

police cars with officers from the sheriff's

department, police officers. They were

around the Lorraine Motel until the afternoon

before the killing. The afternoon of the 3rd

they were ordered to be pulled back to the

fire station on the periphery. When

Inspector Evans was asked who gave him the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2179

instructions to pull them back, he said it

was a request from Dr. King's group. But

when he was asked who, you may recall, he

said, oh, yes, I think it was Reverend Kyles

that gave me that instruction. But the tact

forces were pulled back.

The defendant on the day of the

killing ordered a witness whom you heard who

was working at a waitress for him, ordered

Bobbie Balfour not to take any food upstairs

to Grace Stephens, who was ill, and who had

been receiving food on a daily basis, but

that day, because the second floor of the

rooming house was being used as a staging

ground, no one was allowed up there, and he

told her not to go up there. So she didn't

go. So she didn't go.

Then you heard Olivia Catling, who

had never been spoken to by anyone, Olivia

Catling took the stand and told about a man

coming from an alley that was connected to a

building that was attached to the rooming

house. She saw this man coming through that

alley shortly after the killing, some minutes

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2180

after the killing, and getting into a 1965

Green Chevrolet that was parked on Huling and

then speeding away north on Mulberry Street

right in front of the police, burning rubber

as he went, with no interference whatsoever

from them.

All of these things, all of these

events, I submit to you profoundly are strong

evidence of the existence of a conspiracy

just at the local level, not even mentioning

the fact that the defendant has also

indicated that planning sessions took place

in his grill prior to the assassination.

So I think it is important to see

that total picture of evidence you have.

There should be no doubt that all of these

things are indicative overwhelmingly of

conspiracy.

Now, are we conspiracy buffs because

we find all of this evidence insurmountable?

I think not. But you have heard it. The

masses of Americans have not. And the media

has never put it to them and I submit to you

probably never will. That's why your

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2181

presence is so important.

The crime scene, what about this

crime scene? We submit that the crime scene,

of course, was the back area of the rooming

house. It was terribly overgrown with

bushes. The bushes were thick and they were

difficult to penetrate and that they provided

an excellent sniper's lair. That's where the

crime took place.

Any number of witnesses and evidence

in the record indicates that a person or

persons was seen in those bushes at the time

of the shooting. These are different

accounts that we put into the record,

separate and apart.

There is other evidence, again,

separate independent evidence, that a person

was seen jumping from the wall, jumping over

the wall and running up Mulberry Street. As

a result of this, we've concluded some while

ago and have tried to provide enough impetus

for you to conclude that the shot came from

these bushes and not from the bathroom

window.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2182

The bathroom window and the rooming

house bathroom has been officially the scene

of this crime forever. The State had

evidence long ago that that was not the case,

that the dent in the window sill was not made

by the rifle, even though they maintained

that was the case. The bathroom was seen

open.

The State's main witness was drunk

at the time. He was intoxicated. He

couldn't identify anybody. Captain Tommy

Stephens said he couldn't identify anyone,

much less stand up. Yet it was the affidavit

of Charles Stephens that brought James Earl

Ray back to this country back from England.

That was the basis of the proof that brought

him back.

Do you know what confidence the

State had in their own chief witness? They

didn't even call him at the time of the

guilty plea hearing. He didn't even testify

at that point.

Now, the murder weapon itself, Judge

Joe Brown heard testimony and evidence in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2183

this case for about four years. He paid

particular attention to the weapon, and he

has had a lifetime of experience and

developed knowledge about weapons and about

rifles in particular. We qualified the judge

as an expert. He came before you and he sat

there.

Anyone who heard Judge Brown's

testimony with respect to that weapon should

have no -- and weapons in general should have

no doubt whatsoever that he is in fact an

expert. The media will point to his lack of

technical training, courses having been taken

with respect to learning about rifles. The

other areas for developing expertise happens

to be experience and self knowledge and

development, which is what Judge Brown has.

Judge Brown sat in that chair and

gave you sample technical scientific reasons

why that weapon in evidence is not the murder

weapon very clearly. He said, first of all,

the scope was never sighted in. Because it

was never sighted in, if you use that scope,

to quote him, you couldn't hit the broadside

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2184

of a barn with that weapon, remember that

expression, because it was firing to the left

and below the target, because it was never

sighted in.

He also said the scope couldn't have

been altered by having been dropped in a

bundle. You can't alter a scope to that

extent, its accuracy, by doing that.

He said also that the death slug did

not have the same metallurgical composition

as existed in the lead of the other evidence

bullets that were found in that bundle the

State has always said it was one of a number

of bullets the defendant had and you should

see them as a package, if you will. Judge

Brown said, no, the death slug was different

in metallurgical composition than the bullets

that were there.

Beyond this, there is evidence that

you've heard that this clearly couldn't have

been the murder weapon because the defendant

told a taxi driver, James McCraw, to get rid

of the murder weapon, and he did so. McCraw,

being a close friend of Jowers, a confident

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2185

of Jowers, took the actual murder weapon and

threw it off the Memphis-Arkansas Bridge. So

it is laying at the bottom of the Mississippi

River for over thirty-one years. The real

murder weapon is at the bottom of that

river.

Now, Bill Hamblin, no reason to lie,

he said McCraw would only tell him this when

he got drunk and he told him this over

fifteen years. This is not something McCraw

made up one day. It is over a period of

fifteen years. I remind you that he told

this same story.

Judge Arthur Haynes testified that

he was, of course, James Earl Ray's first

lawyer along with his father, and he

testified that in the course of their early

on-the-scene investigation, they talked to

Guy Canipe, who owned the amusement shop in

front of which was found the bundle which

contained, amongst other things, the rifle.

He said Canipe told them very early on,

before anyone else apparently had done any

kind of tampering with him, told him very

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2186

early on that that bundle was dropped some

minutes before the actual shooting. Imagine

that, that the bundle, the murder weapon, the

rifle in evidence, was dropped minutes before

the actual shooting.

Now we come to Raul, this shadowy

figure who the defendant has mentioned and

who James Earl Ray has talked about right

from the beginning as someone who controlled

him. You have a number of independent

people, not even knowing each other, who have

identified this man from a spread of

photographs that they have seen. And they

range from an English merchant seaman, who we

had to depose by telephone at some length,

who ran into this same Raul at the same bar

James did, up at the Neptune in Montreal.

They range from him to the Grabows, Royce

Wilburn, to the defendant himself who

identified Raul from a spread of photographs

before Ambassador Young and Mr. King, and, of

course, James Earl Ray, who also identified

him.

If that is not enough, if that is

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2187

not enough, we have the British film

producer, Jack Saltman, going to the door of

Raul's house, showing a photograph and

having his daughter admit that that is the

photograph of her father, her words to the

effect that anyone can get that picture or

that photograph of my father. It is from

Immigration & Naturalization. She identified

her own father as the person in that

photograph.

Under subpoena and reluctantly a

Portuguese journalist took the stand. She

had conducted an interview with a member of

the family. The member of that family had

told her that this was a horror, a nightmare

for them and for the family, but the one

comfort they had was that the government was

helping them, that the government had sent

people to their home approximately three

times or so, and that the government was

monitoring their telephone calls and the

government was providing them with guidance.

The government was trying to give them

comfort and advice.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2188

Can you imagine if anything like

that happened to -- if any charges were laid

against any of us in those circumstances, do

you think the government would come around

and see us, help us, monitor our phones?

That act alone indicates the importance and

the significance of this man, Raul. So it

is essential that that be put clearly in the

context.

Now, as I understand it, the defense

had invited Raul to appear here. He is

outside this jurisdiction, so a subpoena

would be futile. But he was asked to appear

here. In earlier proceedings there were

attempts to depose him, and he resisted

them. So he has not attempted to come

forward at all and tell his side of this

story or to defend himself.

As we move into the next area, we're

concerned now about a broader conspiracy, a

broader conspiracy. That is two-pronged,

ladies and gentlemen. On the one hand, the

broader conspiracy goes beyond a shooter in

the bushes who gets away with killing Martin

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2189

King. It goes from him to a Mr. Jowers, who

is involved in facilitating, and it goes back

to Mr. Liberto, whom you've heard was clearly

a part of it, but it goes beyond Mr. Liberto

in terms of the Mob side, because you've

heard from witness Nathan Whitlock how he

used to push a fruit cart in New Orleans with

Mr. Carlos Marcello and that he then has this

relationship and this awareness of Marcello

and Marcello activities. Carlos Marcello has

been the Mob kingpin, was the Mob leader in

this part of the country, for a long, long

time.

So any contract, any Mob contract,

on Martin Luther King's life, would come from

Marcello through Liberto into the local

infrastructure that Marcello had here in

Memphis.

Marcello himself was involved in gun

running. Part of the evidence in terms of

the military involvement is contained in a

lengthy article that we put into evidence

that appears in March of 1993 in the

Commercial Appeal by Steve Tomkins, and that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2190

article indicated that there was a

high-ranking general who had been charged and

imprisoned for aiding and abetting the

trading in stolen weapons. That deal meant

what he was involved in was the theft of guns

from arsenals, armories and camps, like Camp

Shelby in Mississippi, the theft of weapons

from those places that went to -- were

trucked to a Marcello property in New

Orleans, and from the Marcello property in

New Orleans were shipped around the coast

into Houston, Texas, where they were taken

off. And that is where Raul and his crowd

came into the receipt of those weapons before

they went into Latin and South America.

So that's one prong of the broader

conspiracy, the Mob. But, you see, already

there is a relationship between organized

crime and the military in the receipt of

those weapons and in the ongoing sale of

them.

Then we move directly into the

government of the United States, their agents

themselves. We've learned that the 111th

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2191

Military Intelligence Group based at Fort

McPherson in Atlanta, Georgia, were here.

They were in Memphis. They had Martin King

under surveillance. That was open -- quote,

open surveillance, eye-to-eye surveillance.

They had him under surveillance.

Eli Arkin of the Memphis Police

Department Intelligence Bureau, Intelligence

Division, said they were in his office. He

has admitted they were in his office. They

were here.

There was another section here that

was involved in covert surveillance of Martin

King. "Covert" means bugging, wiretapping,

that type of activity. That was done at the

Rivermont when he was here on the 17th or

18th. You heard a witness say he was one of

three people who were effectively a

surveillance team. They had Martin King's

suite bugged, every room of it bugged,

including the balcony. If he wanted to speak

privately and went out on the balcony, they

would pick it up by relay from the roof.

That covert -- that type of covert

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2192

surveillance was carried out by another

agency, usually the Army Security Agency. So

there we have those two agencies involved

very clearly here.

Then there were photographers.

Remember those photographers that Captain

Weeden talked about. They were on the roof

of the fire station. He put them there. Who

were they? They were a psychological

operations team, and they were there and they

photographed everything throughout that day.

That means, ladies and gentlemen,

that there is a film of everything that

happened, photographs of everything that

happened buried somewhere. We tried long and

hard to unearth it unsuccessfully, but it is

there and it is hidden, as it was hidden from

this jury it is hidden from the American

people. Maybe the media one day will let you

know that it exists. But it is there. They

took those photographs. They were what is

known as a psychological operations team, and

we know who the two members of that team

were.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2193

So there is this very strong

presence now, which is primarily

surveillance, it is intelligence gathering,

it is visual and it is audio and it is going

on and Martin King and his group are the

subject of it.

But then there is another group that

is more sinister. They are not more sinister

because of what they did, because they didn't

really do anything, but we know they had a

presence. And that was a special eight-man

sniper unit that was here in Memphis. They

were all part of the 20th Special Forces

Group. They were here and they were assigned

and they were trained for an operation, for a

mission, in Memphis. You heard testimony by

a man who himself was a national security

council operative who was very involved in

Iran-Contra activities, who had been a

long-standing operative, if you will, of the

government of the United States and whose

best friend was a member of that sniper

team. There was no reason in the world for

his best friend other than in a moment of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2194

whatever, anguish or burden, desire to

relieve himself, to talk about this, this

mission that he was on which he was assigned

to in Memphis which was aborted, but he was

assigned to it.

With a Q and A approach you heard

documents of working papers that were used to

get information from other -- from another

source who lives south of the border and who

fled the country in the 1970's out of fear

who was also a part of that unit. So they

were there, and there are three separate

sources that confirm the presence. But they

did not -- it was not necessary for them to

do anything. The mission was aborted because

the Mob contract was successful in killing

Martin Luther King and framing James Earl

Ray.

Remember, one of the things that

Liberto also told the defendant, Loyd Jowers,

was that there was a setup man, there was a

patsy, lined up to take the blame. There was

another area of comfort that the defendant

could have.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2195

Now we move to the cover-up aspect

of this case. This in many ways is the most

sad in a representative democracy to have to

have this kind of cover-up be successful for

so long. It is a shame. It is a tragedy. I

think it goes right to the essence of

democracy and the right of the people to

know.

The cover-up activities in this

case, ladies and gentlemen, range from murder

to press manipulation and distortion, with

bribery in between. Murder, unfortunately in

our view, and from the evidence that you have

heard here, credible sources, is that a taxi

driver who pulled into the Lorraine Motel

maybe six minutes before the killing or so,

shortly before the killing, a Yellow Cab taxi

driver who pulled into that drive and who was

standing at the rear of his car loading the

trunk of the car with the baggage, the

luggage, of someone that was leaving,

unfortunately for him, immediately after the

shooting he saw the shooting and then turned

to look at the other side of the road and saw

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2196

a man come down out of the bushes and run up

the street and get into a waiting Memphis

Police Department traffic car which sped

away.

When he reported this to his

dispatcher, he thought the police had the

assassin because he was in a police car going

away. Well, this man, as you've heard, was

questioned by the police a couple of times

that week. He was to give a statement the

next day.

He didn't give a statement, did he?

No, his body was found off the

Memphis-Arkansas Bridge supposedly thrown out

of a speeding car. Now, when we tried to

find death certificates for this man, we

couldn't, either in Arkansas or in

Tennessee. There is no death record at all.

We found his phone number with that of his

wife listed in 1967, 1966 and 1967, Betty and

Paul Butler. This is all in evidence. The

Polk Directory pages are there for you to

look at. In 1968 it is Betty, brackets,

widow, WID, of Paul, Betty widow, 1968 and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2197

1969 she a widow. Paul Butler was her

deceased husband. He was, for him, in the

wrong place at the wrong time.

That is in some ways the worst of

it. Because is there anything really worse

than losing your life when you've been in the

wrong place at the wrong time?

The next aspect of cover-up is the

tampering, drastic alteration, of the crime

scene. What happened there? You've heard

what happened. Seven o'clock in the morning

Inspector Sam Evans called Maynard Stiles,

who was a public works administrator, and

asked him to get a work crew out there and to

cut down those bushes. They cut the bushes

down.

Now, normally what one does with a

crime scene, at least for quite a period of

time, is to rope it off and keep people out

of it and investigate it as it is. You don't

go and destroy the crime scene. You don't

know what is there. You go and you deal with

it the way it was at the time of the crime.

No, it was cut right to the ground,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2198

cut right to the ground. And however long it

took them to do it, they did a good job,

because it was not possible for a sniper to

be in that area once it was cut to the ground

because he could obviously be very visible.

So the image of a flat, barren area is what

was relayed, and that reinforced the whole

bathroom window.

There was no house-to-house

investigation, ladies and gentlemen. Do you

remember Judge Brown on the stand saying that

this was the most deficient investigation,

criminal investigation, he had ever seen as a

criminal court judge? He is talking about

all of these kinds of things. Imagine, no

house-to-house investigation.

What that means is that no policeman

going and knocking on the door of all of the

local residents and asking them did they see

anything, did they hear anything, because

surely if they had, they would have knocked

on Olivia Catling's door, wouldn't they? She

just lived down the street on Mulberry. She

would have told them what she saw. But they

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2199

didn't. They didn't do that, did they? No,

they didn't do that, not at all. Why?

Why did they suppress two alibi

statements, a statement from Ray Hendricks

and William Reed, who left Jim's Grill, oh,

thirty-five minutes past the hour of five,

forty minutes past the hour of five, right

around there, maybe even -- well, right

around that time. It would be difficult to

pin exact times down.

They left Jim's Grill, saw James

Earl Ray's Mustang parked in front of Jim's

Grill, started to walk up the street and a

couple of minutes later when they went up a

couple of blocks and were about to cross

Vance, one pulled the other back when the

same white Mustang they thought came right

around the corner driving away, as James Earl

Ray had said he done.

He always said he left the scene of

the crime around to that time to try to go

have a spare tire repaired. Here are two

alibi witnesses with statements given to the

FBI in their 302's kept from the defense,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2200

withheld from the guilty plea jury,

suppressed.

What else was suppressed? What was

suppressed was the fact that they had a

scientific report from the FBI that the dent

in the window sill could not sufficiently be

tied to the rifle. They had that. They had

that almost a year prior to the actual guilty

plea hearing. And yet they went before the

guilty plea jury and said that scientific

evidence would establish that the murder

weapon made that dent. Obstruction of

justice, suppression? That and worse.

What about the death slug that could

not be matched? You know, the media and the

State have turned the burden in this case of

matching the bullet to the rifle the other

way around. They are saying because you

can't exclude it, it may be the murder

weapon. That's not the way it works. In any

other case that's not the way it works.

This is not a good rifle in evidence

when you cannot match the death slug to it.

And it was a death slug capable of being

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2201

matched. You have evidence that that bullet

was capable of being matched if it could.

There were enough striations, enough

independent markings that they could match it

if they could.

So the guilty plea hearing heard

none of this. I talked to members of the

guilty plea jury years later. They heard

none of this. This was all kept quiet. They

certainly would have had questions about Mr.

Ray's plea if they had.

They certainly didn't know that his

lawyer had agreed in writing to pay $500 if

he would plead guilty and not cause any

problems and that $500 could be used to hire

another lawyer who could help overturn the

plea. They certainly were not told that.

They certainly were not told those

kinds of pressures that descended on him at

the last minute to cop this plea, which I'm

afraid people do all the time in desperation,

particularly when they are in isolation the

way he was.

What about Captain Weeden? My

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2202

goodness. Captain of the fire station, never

interviewed by local police authorities. The

man who ran that installation, who was there

at the time, never interviewed by the

authorities. Forgetting about knocking on

people's doors. Here is official, he is a

senior executive officer of the fire

station. They didn't talk to him. They

didn't interview him. They didn't ask him

what was going on there that afternoon. Were

they afraid that he would have told them

about the photographers on the roof? Because

if he had, then they wouldn't have been

unnoticed, would they? It wouldn't have been

unnoticed that there were photographs of what

went on, and they would have then had to

request those photographs. So if you don't

talk to Captain Weeden, you don't have to

know about them. If you don't know about it,

you don't ask for it.

You heard Bill Schaap on the stand

for a long time talking about media

distortion and the use of media for

propaganda. He gave you the history of how it

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2203

has developed particularly over the 20th

century America but, of course, it is a

long-standing activity throughout history in

older nations than this.

But Schaap took you painstakingly

through that history down to the present time

when he dealt with the way the media handled

Martin Luther King, how they handled his

opposition to the war in Vietnam, how he was

attacked because of that opposition to the

war.

Then he moved on. There were

similar, comparable attacks on the King

family since they decided they wanted the

truth out in this case and they decided that

James Earl Ray was entitled to a trial,

similar media treatment happened to them that

happened to Martin, similar loss of

contributions and money for the work that

happened to Martin back in those days. The

same thing.

Bill Schaap led you through that.

There were a couple of instances where he

referred to the huge network of ownership and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2204

control of media entities all over the world

by the Central Intelligence Agency. It is a

matter of public record. It has appeared in

Congressional hearings, Senate hearings,

which most people don't read, don't know

anything about, and, of course, the media

only covers in sparse fashion, because it is

contrary to their interests to show that

great numbers of newspapers, radio stations,

television stations, may in fact be actually

owned by the Central Intelligence Agency in

this country as well as elsewhere.

He talked about the numbers of

actual agents who work for media companies,

who are placed in positions in network

television company positions, in newspaper

company positions, on newspaper editorial

board positions.

If you see the history of how

national security cases are covered and this

is one, you will be amazed that some of the

most liberal columnists, writers, respected

journalists, Pulitzer Prize winners, who have

all the liberal credentials, when it comes to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2205

this kind of case, they all of a sudden are

totally with the government because national

security cases are a different ball game.

Ambassador Young ran into one at one

point in an airport, and he said to him, how

can you do this, Tony, about this case, you

have great credentials in every other way,

what is it about this case? His response

was, you'll be happy to know my wife agrees

with you. But that was it. That was the end

of the response.

The point is on these cases there is

a special type of treatment that is given.

It is important to understand that across the

board. That explains a lot of what we're

talking about. Examples: Column 1, New York

Times, November, the article is here, Alton,

Illinois, bank robbery, Wendell Rose, Jr.,

the Times wrote this whole piece, fabricated,

whole cloth, that the Ray brothers robbed the

bank in Illinois and that's where James got

his money and therefore there is no Raul.

The problem was that the article

said that the Times had conducted a special

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2206

investigation that paralleled that of the

House Select Committee and that of the FBI,

and all three investigations indicated this

was the case. Case closed, this is where Ray

got his money.

The problem is they never talked to

the chief of police in Alton, Illinois. They

never talked to the president of the bank in

Alton, Illinois. There was no

investigation. And when those people were

talked to by myself or by Jerry Ray, who went

down there to turn himself in -- you think I

did this, I'm prepared to turn myself in --

the guy said, go away, you've never been a

suspect. Isn't that amazing, out of whole

cloth. But it appears, and that's the

mindset that the people have.

You heard Earl Caldwell say he was

sent to Memphis by his national editor, New

York Times national editor, Claude Sitton at

the time, and told to go to Memphis and his

words were "nail Dr. King." Nail Dr. King.

That is what he said he was told was his

mission here in Memphis as a New York Times

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2207

reporter. I can go on. But these are

examples of what happens with the media.

Now, Bill Schaap told you the impact

of that out of thirty-one years is very

devastating, is very hard to hear this for

thirty-one years and have somebody come along

and say, no, you've been told the wrong thing

and here are a whole set of facts that are

uncontrovertible and this is why you've been

old the wrong thing.

The reaction is still, oh, yes,

that's interesting, but the next day we still

believe, because it is almost implanted

neurologically. That's the problem that this

kind of distortion, media propaganda abuse,

just raises.

Mr. Jowers here, the defendant, was

a victim of that. They gave him -- ABC gave

him a lie detector test and they told him at

the end of that lie detector test that he had

failed, why was he doing this, was he looking

for money, he had failed this lie detector

test.

You heard from a cab driver, who has

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2208

nothing to gain by this, take the stand and

say, yeah, he drove those ABC people to the

airport, took them to the airport, and he

heard their conversation. His ears perked up

when he heard Jowers' name because he heard

them, the guy in the front, the examiner,

said, I couldn't get him to waver, I couldn't

get him to waver. They were commenting on

how much he remembered in so much detail and

why he remembered so much detail.

There is no question about him

failing this test. They couldn't get the

defendant to lie. And yet that program was

broadcast, was put out to masses of people in

this country to believe to this day that the

defendant lied, that he lied.

Now, you heard -- we're still on

cover-up. I'm sorry. You heard about two

efforts to bribe James Earl Ray. I don't

know of any others, but you have heard of two

in particular, one from a lawyer, Jack

Kershaw, who told you about a meeting at the

Nelson Book Publishing Company and he was

offered a sum of money if Ray would admit

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2209

that he did it. He was offered this money by

William Bradford Huey, who was a writer, if

Ray would confess that he did it and did it

alone and he would give him this money and

give him a pardon and he would go on and have

a nice life.

Mr. Kershaw went over to the prison,

as you heard, asked Mr. Ray if you want to

take up this wonderful offer. Ray, of

course, said, no, and sent him packing. Some

while later a telephone -- on a telephone

conversation Huey made the same offer to

Jerry Ray. His problem then was that that

conversation was recorded. Jerry Ray

testified and you have a transcript of that

recording, he was offered now $220,000, they

greatly increased the sum of money, $220,000,

also a pardon. And the best story, of

course, that they wanted, that Huey wanted,

was the story why I killed Martin Luther

King.

So they were offering him money, a

pardon if he would tell that story. It

didn't work. James, of course, was not

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2210

interested in anything of the sort. James

had always only wanted, from three days after

his conviction, he had always wanted a

trial. That is what he wanted.

Then there were a number of attempts

to kill James Earl Ray. These attempts

vary. One time he escaped from Brushy

Mountain in 1977, he escaped from Brushy

Mountain with six others. No sooner did his

feet hit the ground and they were up in the

woods there -- if you know that area of

Petros, Tennessee, it is pretty rural in some

areas and rocky and hilly -- he was up in the

woods, and no sooner did he go get up in the

woods but there was an FBI SWAT team out of

the Knoxville office on the scene.

Who asked for them? It is a State

escape, State prisoner. The State is

handling it. No, here comes in the SWAT

team. They have snipers with sniper rifles.

What are they going to do with those sniper

rifles?

Lewis Stokes was chairman of the

Select Committee on Assassinations. He calls

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2211

Ray Blanton, who is a governor of the State

at the time. Reverend Fauntroy was a part of

to that conversation and said he was the one

who encouraged Stokes to call, but he was

there. Stokes calls Blanton and says that

you better get over to Brushy Mountain. If

you don't, I'm going to lose my most famous

witness and your most famous prisoner because

the FBI is going to kill him. Blanton goes

over in a helicopter and chases the FBI

away.

They didn't what to go at first. He

told them he would put them in the same sell

James Earl Ray came out of if they didn't.

He saved James Earl Ray's life. He was

caught and brought back by local authorities,

which is the way it should have been.

The second attempt was in April of

1978. You heard April Ferguson, public

defender counsel, tell you how that worked.

She went out, interviewed a prisoner who had

called their office when April and Mark Lane

were representing James back at that time.

He was offered a contract. He was asked to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2212

put out a contract on James Earl Ray, and he

decided not to do it.

One, he thought he was being set up

because the person who called him left a

number and he had to call him back. When he

called had him back, he was calling him back

at an Executive Suites hotel that he knew,

the prisoner knew, was being used by the

local US Attorney's Office and the FBI where

they interviewed informants and where they

did the briefings. That's where the phone

call came from.

He thought he was being set up. The

phone call came to him from a fellow called

Arthur Wayne Baldwin, who was a Mob figure in

Memphis but who also was involved as a

federal informant and was used by the

government.

So he gave the statement of how this

contract was put out by Baldwin on James Earl

Ray's life, and Ms. Ferguson testified as to

her affidavit.

Defendant's prior admissions, the

next section of plaintiffs' case, you've

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2213

heard a good deal of it, how the defendant

has admitted how he was approached by

Mr. Liberto and how he was told that he would

receive a package, which he did, and money

and eventually a rifle to hold, and he told

about planning sessions in his cafe, and he

told about taking a rifle from the shooter,

taking the rifle from the shooter, one that

was still smoking, he said, taking it from

his back door.

He named the shooter as a Memphis

Police Department lieutenant, Earl Clark, who

is deceased, who was a sharpshooter who he

said was a hunting companion of his, a friend

of his, and a friend of Liberto's as well and

who never had any contact with him again

after this day.

Now, Mrs. Clark, the first wife, who

testified, gave her husband an alibi. It is

only fair that you consider what Ms. Clark

said. When I first interviewed here in

1992 -- she referred to that interview. In

fact, her son was there. He was not

twenty-two. He was born later. He was about

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2214

sixteen. Her daughter was born in 1970. It

was the son who was present. She told

essentially the same story at that point in

time.

There are serious questions with

that story, and they have to do with whether

or not in fact Lieutenant Clark had a radio

at all at that point in time and whether or

not in fact Dent Cleaners was open later than

six p.m. on that day. Because by her

accounts she got there sometime between

six-thirty and six-forty to pick up his

uniform. But, in any event, you have to

consider all of that.

Lastly, in respect of the

defendant's situation, we had placed a

woman -- aspects of a woman's testimony into

the record so that you can review it, and she

was a waitress who had been a lover of the

defendant during that previous year.

She very reluctantly in 1992 gave a

statement that had really to be worked out of

her. She didn't want to tell this story even

then because she was afraid that her former

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2215

lover and boss, Mr. Jowers, was the killer.

He was the only one she saw, she said, out

there, and she was afraid that he was the

killer. Plaintiffs do not believe that to be

the case at this point in time.

She described him running, face

white as a sheet, looking like a wild man

with all mud on his knees, as though he had

been kneeling in that brush area. She has

been to some extent discredited because there

have been -- people have descended upon her

for various reasons. She was a -- a

statement of hers was taken repudiating a lot

of things she said, but she subsequently said

in another sworn statement that she didn't

even read what the state officials told her

to sign.

So in a case like this, this is a

difficult area for you to assess for

yourselves in terms of what you read and what

you have heard here.

The last area of the plaintiffs'

case has to do with damages. We've addressed

that. Members of the family have addressed

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2216

that in terms of the spirit in which the

family has approached these proceedings from

the beginning.

Yes, we want a verdict of liability,

a verdict of a finding of conspiracy, but the

family is not interested to benefit

financially from these proceedings. There

has to be damages in civil litigation of this

sort. It is a wrongful death action. So the

request is that there be an award of one

hundred dollars to offset funeral expenses at

the time. And that one hundred dollars the

family has decided to contribute, along with

other contributions, to a welfare fund of the

sanitation workers in this city, because that

is the reason that Dr. King came here in the

first place.

Now, what I'd like to do is to

briefly take you through a visual summary, it

will be much quicker than my verbal summary,

but to take you through a visual picture of

the summary of what you have just heard in

terms of the major aspects of the plaintiffs'

case.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2217

THE COURT: Does anybody need a

break?

A JUROR: Yes.

THE COURT: You do? All right.

Just five minutes.

(Jury out.)

(Short recess.)

THE COURT: All right, Sheriff.

Bring the jury back out, please.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: All right,

Mr. Pepper. You may resume.

MR. PEPPER: Thank you, Your

Honor. We have a depiction of the overall

seen of the assassination at about five

forty-three, the time we've pinpointed, on

the afternoon of the assassination. Here in

this depiction we have two people on the

firehouse roof, we show two people in the

brush area at this time, a number of

witnesses down below the balcony right in

there.

THE COURT: Mr. Pepper, excuse

me. Can you see that?

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2218

A JUROR: Yes.

MR. PEPPER: Am I in your way?

THE COURT: You may stand over

here, Mr. Pepper.

MR. PEPPER: There is also a

car, a Chevrolet car, parked here on Huling,

and two Mustangs on South Main Street.

You will remember Charles Hurley

testified that he drove up behind this

Mustang when he was picking his wife up. It

had Arkansas plates. This Mustang is

believed to have been James Earl Ray's.

Now, when we move ahead, we're still

at five forty-three, but it is between five

forty-three and five forty-four, Hendricks

and Reed, who have been in Jim's Grill here,

have come out and have since walked up this

street. About this time this first Mustang

has pulled off. Everything else remains the

same. You have the photographers on the

roof, you have the two figures in the brush,

who we believe to be Earl Clark and Loyd

Jowers, and you have witnesses below the

balcony over here.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2219

Now we're at five-fifty. The

evidence reveals that this first Mustang is

gone. The second Mustang still remains.

Photographers still remain clicking away on

the roof. The figures in the brush still

remain. The Invaders have started to leave

the hotel. They are coming down the stairs

and they are leaving at five-fifty. They

were noticed leaving. Billy Kyles, Reverend

Kyles, is right there knocking on Martin

King's door as the evidence indicates at ten

minutes to six. The witnesses are still down

below.

At five fifty-five, the Invaders are

now off the premises, they've gone. Reverend

Kyles has come away from the door and is on

the balcony to the right of the door. The

witnesses are still below. Photographers are

still in their perch photographing. The

Chevrolet is still parked where was. And now

a Memphis Police Department traffic car has

pulled up to this intersection right here at

Mulberry and Huling. In addition to that,

about this time a rifle and an evidence

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2220

bundle has been dropped by this figure right

here in Canipe's.

Next. Still at five fifty-five,

between five fifty-five and five fifty-six,

the Yellow taxicab has pulled into the

Lorraine driveway and is loading a

passenger. The man who has dropped the rifle

has now approached this second Mustang with

the Arkansas plates here. The figures in the

bushes are still there. The Chevrolet is

there and the taxi driver himself is standing

toward the rear of his car next. About five

fifty-six, in that area, Martin King appears

on the balcony and begins to talk to a number

of the people below who we've been calling as

witnesses. The taxi driver is still there

unloading a passenger's luggage, and the

photographers are there. The rifle remains,

but now the second Mustang moves off. The

traffic car remains in position and the

Chevrolet remains where was.

Okay. Six-oh-one p.m., April 4th,

1968, Martin Luther King has been felled by a

single shot. Everything else remains the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2221

same. The taxi driver is facing the brush

area. The photographers are still on the

roof of the fire station. The rifle in

evidence remains in Canipe's doorway. The

Chevrolet remains on Huling. The Memphis

traffic car remains at the intersection of

Mulberry and Huling. The figures in the

bushes at this point remain there.

Next. Instantly, between six-oh-one

and six-oh-two, immediately after the shot,

one of the two figures, and we maintain it is

the defendant, is moving toward his building

carrying the murder weapon. The other figure

in the bush, in the bushes, is going down --

appears to be at this point not going down

but appears to be alone around the edge of

the wall. The photographers are there. The

taxi driver is still there looking at the

brush area, and journalist Earl Caldwell,

having heard the shot, has come out of his

room.

It is difficult to do this with

computers. You may recall Caldwell was in

his shorts standing there looking at the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2222

bushes seeing this figure in the bushes. The

traffic car remains there. Kyles remains off

to the right of the fallen Martin King

instantly after the shot. The witnesses are

there, some of whom turn toward the bushes

looking up in that direction.

Next. Also between six-oh-one and

six-two, because that's what it takes,

Mr. Jowers has entered his establishment.

The shooter has gone down over the wall and

has run toward that Memphis traffic vehicle,

car vehicle, right there. This is all

happening between six-oh-one and

six-oh-two. That's the period of time in

which this was carried out.

The taxi driver has seen the shooter

jump from the wall and run to here and get

into that traffic car. The photographers

must have photographed it. There they are.

The rifle remains. Mr. Jowers has entered

his establishment at that point in time.

Okay. Around six-oh-five, under

great pressure from his passenger, the taxi

driver actually drives away, left the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2223

Lorraine parking lot. The shooter, having

gotten into that traffic car, is also gone,

disappeared. That traffic car sped up

Huling, west on Huling. It is gone.

Mr. Jowers is inside his establishment, the

witnesses remain in place where they were.

Mr. Caldwell has gone back into his room to

put on his trousers.

Next. We're at about six-oh-eight.

At this point in time barricades in the form

of police cars have been established at

either end of Mulberry, thus blocking any

entrance to the street. We're at

six-oh-seven. I'm a minute ahead of myself.

We're at about six-oh-seven.

Everything else remains pretty much

the same except Journalist Caldwell has come

out of his room again and would eventually

make his way up to the balcony. Dr. King is

still down, witnesses are in place,

photographers are in place, the rifle remains

where it is, and Reverend Kyles is still on

the balcony.

Also at six-oh-seven or thereabouts

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2224

Olivia Catling has arrived at the corner of

Mulberry and Huling. She has three children

with her. Two are hers and one is a neighbor

child. She has come to that corner just

about this time, having heard the shot from

inside her house. Everything else remains

pretty much in place with the photographers,

the witnesses and Journalist Caldwell coming

out and the rifle still at Canipe's.

Okay. About six-oh-nine we have a

man appearing in the alley. This is the

first time he has appeared. He has

apparently come from connected buildings to

the rooming house and he is now seen in the

alley. Everything else remains the same.

The barricades are in place. Mrs. Catling is

there.

Next. He moves between this time,

within a minute, very quickly to this car

seen by Mrs. Catling and the children.

Next. He gets in the car and rips

off east on Huling, making a sharp turn going

north on Mulberry right in front of this

police barricade and proceeds unimpeded north

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2225

on Mulberry away from the scene.

Now, at that point in time Mrs.

Catling notices a fireman who is standing in

front of the wall, and he is talking to

policemen, yelling at policemen, that the

shot came from the clump of bushes up there.

They apparently are not listening to him.

Those are the -- that's the visual

depiction of the critical events that we

wanted to put forward.

Well, ladies and gentlemen,

sometimes that is helpful to amplify the

verbal narrative. Sometimes it confuses more

than it helps. But I think we've tried to

draw this and depict it as precisely as we

can within the constraints of the actual

evidence that has been presented to you.

Let me close by saying to you that

long after people forget what has been said

in this courtroom, all the words that you've

heard from witnesses and lawyers, and long

after they have forgotten about accounts that

they have read about this case, they are

going to remember what was done here. They

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2226

are going to remember what action you took,

what decision you came to.

You have got to understand the

monumental importance of your decision. You

are going to -- they are going to forget

everything I said, everything defense counsel

has said, everything the witnesses have

said. They are going to remember one thing,

the ruling of this jury, the verdict of this

jury because you have heard evidence that has

never before been put on in a court of law.

Some of it would have been put on in

Mr. Ray's trial, if he had ever been granted

a trial. He wasn't. It wasn't heard. Judge

Brown was on the verge of granting that

trial, on the eve, in our view, so close to

granting that trial, and then he was removed

by the Court of Appeals in this state from

the case, summarily removed. Without any

argument, any oral argument, they made that

decision. So Mr. Ray never had the trial.

He was in his dying months when he might have

gotten that trial. The Court of Appeals

finished that possibility.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2227

Only you have heard this. The

people in the United States of America have

not heard this. The masses of people in this

country or the world have not heard this.

They've heard snippets, they've heard edited

clips on various documentaries and programs,

but no one has heard the detailed evidence

that you have here.

That is why your decision at this

point in time is the most significant

decision that will have been taken in

thirty-one years in terms of this case.

Please don't underestimate the importance of

it.

In our view, what has happened in

this case, the injustice that has happened in

this case, and it may be symptomatic of other

cases, we don't know -- we haven't gotten

into that, we've just focused on this

case -- but what has happened here in our

view is representative of the failure that

symbolizes to me the failure of

representative democracy in this country.

Isn't it amazing that one could say

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2228

that over a simple murder case. But when you

look at the wealth of evidence that has come

forward and you understand how this case has

been conducted and you understand how it has

been covered up, and when you see how

unresponsive elected officials and government

has been and how complicit they have been,

you can come to no other choice.

Governmental agencies caused Martin Luther

King to be assassinated. They used other

foot soldiers. They caused this whole thing

to happen. And they then proceeded with the

powerful means at their disposal to cover

this case up.

This is a conspiracy that

involved -- and that's a nasty word. People

insult people in this country who use the

word "conspiracy." Nowhere else in the

world, as Bill Schaap told you, is it viewed

that way. In Italy and France conspiracy is

taken for granted because they have lived

with it so much longer. Remember that there

were thirty-nine daggers going into Caesar.

You know, these things do not happen

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2229

as a rule without the involvement of other

people and in this case, this type of murder,

without the involvement of seriously

prominent individuals in government. So it

is in my view a failure of democracy and this

Republic that it has not been able to bring

this forward.

What we're asking you to do at this

point in time is send a message. We're

asking you to send a message, not just right

a wrong. That's important, that you right a

wrong and that you allow justice to prevail

once and for all. Let it prevail.

Let justice and truth prevail, elst

the heavens's fall. No matter what, let it

prevail. Let it come forward. We're asking

you to let that happen.

But in addition to that, we're

asking you to send a message, send a message

to all of those in power, all of those who

manipulate justice in this country that you

cannot get away with this. Or if you can get

away with it, you can only get away with it

for so long.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2230

Ultimately truth-crushed earth will

rise again, and it has risen in this

courtroom, ladies and gentlemen. Send that

message. You, you twelve, represent the

American people. You are their

representatives with respect to justice in

this case. They cannot be here. The media

will keep the truth from them forever. You

represent the people of this land. You must

speak for them.

In all of my years I've had

confidence in one institution anywhere in the

Anglo-American world, and it is a jury. It

is twelve people independently hearing

evidence and ruling. That's you. You have

this duty to yourselves, this obligation to

your fellow citizens, and you have an

opportunity to act in a most significant way

that perhaps you can ever imagine, because

your verdict of conspiracy in this case, your

verdict of liability for the defendant and

his other co-conspirators, means history is

rewritten, means textbooks have to be

rewritten, means the actual result of this

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2231

case and the truth of this case now must come

forward formally.

This message also will be sent to

the Attorney General of the United States,

whose team are investigating in a limited

way, they say, this case. But you have heard

much more, so that is why this message is so

important. Please send it.

On behalf of the family of Martin

Luther King, Jr., on behalf of the people of

the United States, I ask you to find for the

plaintiff and find that conspiracy existed

and that those conspirators involved not only

the defendant here but we're dealing in

conspiracy with agents of the City of Memphis

and the governments of the State of Tennessee

and the United States of America.

We ask you to find that conspiracy

existed and once and for all give this

plaintiff family justice and let's cleanse

this city and this nation of the ignorance

that has pervaded this case for so long. Let

the truth reign in this courtroom once and

for all.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2232

Thank you very much.

THE COURT: Mr. Garrison.

MR. GARRISON: Good morning,

ladies and gentlemen. I promise you one

thing, I won't take that long. Let me say

this first of all: I've been practicing law

here starting forty years this past August,

and I think this is the most important case

to me that I've ever been associated with.

I've tried cases in this courtroom and all

over this courthouse, and I think this case

is the most important case I've ever been

associated with. I say that because it is

important to the King family, it is important

to the American way of life, important to

quality and important to history now.

Over the past few years I've met

with Ms. Coretta King and Mr. Dexter King and

the family, and they are a very lovable

family. They have gone through more than any

family should have to go through and simply

because of the color of their skin, because

Dr. King simply was seeking equality and

equal rights. And if our Constitution means

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2233

anything, it means that is for everybody.

Now, Dr. Pepper has pursued this

case for years. He is like a bulldog on your

trousers. You just can't shake him loose,

you can't shake him off. If it wasn't for

him, we wouldn't be here today. He and I

have many areas of agreement, but we have

many areas of disagreement. I want to point

those out you to now.

First of all, let me say this: I

told you at the beginning that anything that

Mr. Jowers had to do with this was very, very

minute and small. I think the proof fairly

shows that.

Here is a man who had a greasy-spoon

restaurant, a beer joint, to put it bluntly,

that was there in a place where he had been

dealing with a Mr. Liberto, and perhaps those

things weren't the way they should be, but he

is not on trial for that. He simply said

that I had handled money for Mr. Liberto

previously and that here again he asked me to

handle some money.

He said he was going to send a box

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2234

to him. I didn't know what it was. He said

that the money came in and the box came in

and that he said someone would pick up the

box and you be at the back door at six

o'clock and something would be handed to

you. He says I didn't know anything.

Now, he met with Mr. Dexter King and

Ambassador Young freely and voluntarily at

his own expense, his own time. He told them

what limited information he had about this.

He was very honest with them and very sincere

in telling them what he knew about this case,

which was very limited.

He told Dexter King, which Mr. King

admitted here, that he said I didn't know

anything about this as far as it being Dr.

King that would be the target of

assassination, I had no knowledge of that.

He said, I apologize to you for

anything that I may have done that would

cause the death of your father, but I had no

idea, no knowledge, it was just simply

something I was doing and had been doing

previously, it wasn't any different from the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2235

other things.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, it is

ironic to note here that there is only one

person that has placed any blame on

Mr. Jowers as far as being there doing

anything. That's Ms. Spates. You've heard

her testimony. You've heard an affidavit

read to you that she gave to the prosecutors

of the City of Memphis, their investigators.

She first tried to say that

Mr. Jowers was there and she saw him and all

this thing about him being white and so forth

and so on, but she came back and in an

exhibit here that you have a right to see

said I wasn't even there, I was at work that

day, I didn't see anything, because I didn't

see Mr. Jowers with a gun, I never saw

anything, I was at work that day.

Which version do you believe? This

is a sworn statement, a sworn statement under

oath she gave to the prosecutors. It is

saying I wasn't even there. So which version

do you believe of Ms. Spates?

She first tried to say she had been

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2236

offered some money by Mr. Jowers and even by

me. Yet the first thing I asked her in her

testimony is -- I had never seen the lady but

twice in my life -- Ms. Spates, isn't it true

you have never been offered any money, we

never even talked about any money? She said,

that's exactly right.

She goes on to say, I was never

offered any money. So you have Ms. Spates,

who is the only person that said anything

about Mr. Jowers' involvement in this, and

which version do you believe? Do you believe

that she told the truth one time or the other

time? Both of them were under oath.

Now, as far as Mr. McCraw, I knew

Mr. McCraw, represented him for years. The

thing about Mr. McCraw is that as Mr. Hamblin

said, you couldn't believe a thing he said.

That's his best friend, he got on the stand

and said you couldn't believe a word he

said.

Mr. Jowers played a very, very

insignificant and minor role in this if he

played anything at all. He stated because of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2237

who he has come forth and said, that he has

lost his wife, everything he has and his

health. So he played a very insignificant,

very small role, if anything in this thing.

It was much bigger than Mr. Jowers, who owned

a little greasy-spoon restaurant there and

happened to be at the location that he was.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, I guess

the area of disagreement between Dr. Pepper

and myself for the most part is this: It is

Mr. James Earl Ray's part in this case.

Let's look at this. You know, you have Mr.

Ray here, who was a convict who spent

ninety-nine and nine-tenths of his life in

prison, who would do anything for money.

He'd rob, take a gun, steal, do anything for

money. He enjoyed his notoriety as the most

famous prisoner this state has ever known.

He enjoyed that. That was a big thing with

him.

Here he was let out of prison in a

bread truck. If you saw the poster here

that's an exhibit, fifty dollars reward. Big

reward for him, wasn't it, for a man. He

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2238

came and talked Dr. King. Don't you think it

is ironic he was in Atlanta, Chicago, Los

Angeles, Memphis, Tennessee, when Dr. King

was there, Selma, Alabama, little town of

Selma when Dr. King was there?

Don't you think it is ironic that

there was a map that they found when he was

in Atlanta where he circled Dr. King's home,

his church, his place of business? I asked

him on the deposition -- I know the

deposition was long and burdensome to you,

but I want you to hear what he said. He has

told a thousand and one stories. This was

his last one. This is number one thousand

and one. As far as I know, it is the last

time he ever told his story and testified.

It is ironic that he had a map of

Atlanta with these three markings. He had

never been to Memphis, never been to

Birmingham, never been to New Orleans, no

maps. But a map of Atlanta was found in his

car which admitted had the circle around Dr.

King's home, his place of business and Dr.

King's church.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2239

Now, the State of Tennessee says

that James Earl Ray acted and acted alone. I

think there is some validity to that. I

don't agree with everything they say, but I

think there is some validity to it. Mr. Ray,

when I asked him how did you know that Dr.

King had been assassinated, he said, I heard

it on the news. I had just gone through a

whole series of questions where he said, I

never listened to the news. I said, didn't

you know they had riots in Memphis, didn't

you know there was someone killed there? He

said, I never listened to the news. Five

minutes after Dr. King was killed, yeah, I

heard it on the news. I think Mr. Ray's

testimony speaks for itself.

He goes in and buys a gun he says

from somebody named Raul that asked him to

do this, but he gets a gun that Raul says --

first of all, Raul didn't tell him to get a

scope. He got that on his own. He didn't

tell him to get a scope on a rifle. He goes

in and says, I want another gun, this is not

the right gun, Raul told me to do this, but

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2240

he never showed the gun to Raul. Was there

really a Raul? Maybe there was. Isn't it

ironic that for months no one ever saw him

with Mr. Ray, no one, no one.

Now, when you take all the testimony

here from Mr. Ray and all the scenarios and

the things that happened, it makes you

wonder, did Mr. Ray do this? Dr. Francisco

says, I was taken up to the window there

where the shot was supposed to have come from

and I saw the path of the bullet. In my

opinion, it came from that window sill. This

is a medical examiner saying that.

Ladies and gentlemen, last year the

Attorney General's Office here concluded a

five-year investigation, five years, and this

is a report of theirs. Don't decide this

case without reading this report. It is an

exhibit. You can read it. Don't decide the

case without seeing this. It wouldn't be

fair to anyone if you didn't. They concluded

that there is no proof here that anyone acted

in this case except Mr. Ray that was

material.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2241

Now, you know, you wonder sometimes

why people tell things, and you've got to

think about, well, is that -- what are the

circumstances? Because in March of 1969,

here again is an exhibit which you need to

read before deciding this case, Mr. Ray was

asked by Judge Battle, "Are you pleading

guilty to murder in the first degree in this

case because you killed Dr. Martin Luther

King under such circumstances that would make

you legally guilty of murder in the first

degree under the law as explained to you by

your lawyers? Answer, yes."

Now, ladies and gentlemen, I think

under the circumstances, if you remember

former Congressman Fountroy here said -- I

asked him, why did the committee conclude

that Mr. Ray was the assassin? What was his

answer? He said because he kept changing his

story. Do you remember that? That's the

testimony he gave here, a gentleman who was

in charge of the congressional committee.

This went on for weeks and weeks and

weeks. They spent money, untold sums of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2242

money to investigate this case. They

concluded that Mr. Ray was the one who pulled

the trigger, was the one who did the

assassination.

Now, let me say this: After

spending several years with this case and

talking to many, many witnesses, listening to

this trial and taking many depositions, you

can't help but wonder about things. You've

got to wonder from this standpoint: Would

the restaurant owner of a greasy-spoon

restaurant and a lone assassin, could they

pull away officers from the scene of an

assassination? Could they change rooms?

Could they put someone up on top of the fire

station? A convict and a greasy-spoon

restaurant owner, could they do that?

You know, when this trial started,

there are two people mentioned in this guilty

plea who are still living. I talked to them

and issued subpoenas for them to be here who

are prosecutors to explain you to ladies and

gentlemen as to why there wasn't more done to

investigate this case. Mr. Ray tried several

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2243

times, seven, eight, nine times, to get a

trial the Court of Appeals, the Supreme

Court, never granted it. He was turned down

that many times.

Why didn't they test the gun? I

don't know. It doesn't make sense to me.

You know, that would have ended this case if

they had tested the gun. There is DNA --

they can use means now to test these guns.

They could find out if they wanted to. Why

wasn't that done? I don't understand.

I've never understood as to why the

prosecutors and the Attorney General, if they

really wanted to end this case and solve it,

why didn't they test the gun. That would

have told us whether or not Mr. Ray -- that

was the gun that did it with his fingerprints

on it or was it another gun. It was never

done. They fought it and fought it and

fought it.

I talked to two prosecutors who

agreed to be here to testify, who had

subpoenas to be here. The day before

yesterday, without you knowing, the Court of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2244

Appeals said, no, you can't bring them in.

They turned us down again. That's the same

thing we've had over and over and over.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, it is

ironic in this case that when the extradition

proceedings were started against Mr. Ray,

that it was to try to extradite him for

conspiracy to murder. That was the first

thing the United States government tried to

extradite Mr. Ray for, was conspiracy to

murder.

You know, when you stop and

rationalize this case and think, there has to

be more to it than a greasy-spoon restaurant

owner and an escaped convict. They could not

have arranged these things. They could not

have done those things.

Mr. Arkin testified here that one

hour before the assassination, or a couple

hours, there was a man that came in from

Washington, sent in here from Washington

saying Mr. Redditt has had a threat on his

life and you've got to go get him. Could a

greasy-spoon operator and escaped convict

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2245

arrange for that? You know that's not the

case. And I do, too. Anyone who can think

knows better than that.

Mr. Arkin also said there were

officers from the United States government in

his office. Why were they here? What were

they doing here? They were sent here by the

United States government.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, we've had

problems with race in Memphis, and I'm sorry

to say that I must talk about it to some

extent. It has been said by a person who was

very knowledgeable that we have the most

serious racial divisions in Memphis of any

city in this nation, and that's bad, that's

terrible. We've got to live together and

learn to live together and to know that we

are all brothers and sisters. It shouldn't

be this way. It shouldn't be that we should

have this type racism and the type problems

we have.

In this case you have the

opportunity to speak. You'll speak in your

verdict in case that will either say one of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2246

two things: That we know that there was a

conspiracy here, we know that they didn't

intend for Dr. King to go to Washington to

march, and we know that the United States

government, the FBI and the Memphis Police

Department and other government agencies

along with Mr. Liberto and Mr. Earl Clark and

Mr. James Earl Ray were involved in this

case, and that's the type verdict that I

would ask you to consider.

You told me at the beginning you

weren't afraid to let the chips fall where

they may. I gather from that that you are

not afraid of the United States government,

you are not afraid of the Memphis Police

Department. If they are liable, you are

going to say they are. Am I correct? Isn't

that what we agreed to?

I think the testimony here that

you've heard and the proof that you've heard

indicates clearly there is more than just

Mr. Jowers involved. He was a small-time

greasy-spoon cafe operator who played a very

small insignificant part in this case, if

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2247

anything.

If you will study over the reports

I've provided for you and the exhibits, think

about all the testimony that has been given

here and what really happened, ladies and

gentlemen, your verdict would have to be that

the United States government, the FBI, the

Memphis Police Department and others were

involved in this conspiracy to murder Dr.

King.

It is a shameful, terrible thing

that happened here in Memphis. I'm sorry and

apologize to Mr. King that it did, but think

about it. It is a very serious matter.

You'll never have a more serious opportunity

to sit on a jury than this where the issues

are more serious than this.

Whatever you say will be recorded in

history, and this will be it. We expect this

case to end after this. It has been going on

for years, but we think it is going to end

with your decision in this case.

Please give it serious consideration

and please think about a judgment against

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2248

others besides Mr. Jowers. He played a very

small part, you know he did, in this case.

Think about the other part that Mr. Ray

played, Mr. Liberto played. You've got

testimony here from a witness that is

uncontradicted saying that Mr. Liberto told

me he had Martin Luther King assassinated.

Go over it. Think about it. Read over it.

There is only one thing to do,

that's to say that we, the jury, find that

the United States government, FBI, State of

Tennessee, Mr. Liberto, Mr. James Earl Ray,

they were all involved in a conspiracy to

murder Dr. Martin Luther King. That's the

only decision you can make.

Thank you.

MR. PEPPER: I didn't realize I

was going to have to try Mr. James Earl Ray's

guilt or innocence in this courtroom, but

counsel has raised it, so I should address

some of the issues.

Mr. Ray had a habit of marking

maps. I have in my possession maps that he

marked when he was in Texas, Montreal and

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2249

Atlanta, and what he did was it helped him to

locate what he did and where he was going.

The Atlanta map is nowhere related to Dr.

King's residence.

It is three oblong circles that

covered general areas, one where he was

living on Peachtree. He did this. He did

this up in Montreal at the Neptune Bar, did

this in Texas when he was going down to

Mexico and Laredo. It was a habit that James

had. The maps are part of his practice, if

you will.

James never stalked Martin Luther

King. James was moved from place to place on

instructions. He was told to go somewhere

and he would go. He was given to some money,

told to come to New Orleans and he would be

given money.

James Earl Ray was in Los Angeles

and was told to go to New Orleans. When

Martin Luther King came to Los Angeles, James

Earl Ray left. He was there first and he

left. He didn't stay in Los Angeles. That

was the time he left for Atlanta when Martin

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2250

came there in March.

He was in Atlanta when Martin King

was there part of the time, but Dr. King was

in and out of Atlanta a great deal of the

time. So he would have to be there some of

the time. He was not in Selma when Martin

King was in Selma. That is a myth. He

didn't stalk Dr. King. There was no reason

to stalk him.

He wasn't in New York when he was in

New York. He wasn't in Florida when he was

in Florida. He wasn't in Chicago when Martin

King was in Chicago. He worked in Wanetka,

Illinois, for a period of time.

He wasn't in prison ninety-nine

percent of his time. Before James Earl Ray

went into the Army, he held down jobs. When

came out, he held down jobs. When he got

fired, that's when he started to get in

trouble. He went and hung out in bars

occasionally and somebody would suggest a

good idea about how to get some money. So

James fell into it. He was, rightly as

Mr. Garrison says, was a penny-ante crook.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2251

That's really what it came down to.

He knew nothing about firearms. The

man who sold him the rifle, Donald Woods,

said he never saw a person who new less about

firearms than James Earl Ray. Never saw a

person who knew less about firearms.

He used to carry a pistol. When he

would stick up a store, he would carry a

pistol, and he had five bullets in the

pistol. I asked him, James, why would you

have five bullets in the pistol, why not

six? He always kept the firing pin chamber

empty.

He was embarrassed to tell me.

Finally I got it out of him. One time

literally he shot himself in the foot. It

was an accident and the gun went off. He

decided if he kept the firing pin chamber

empty, that wouldn't happen. He only had

five bullets. When he was arrested at

Heathrow in London, that gun he was carrying

had only five bullets.

He was somebody who was capable of

being used for a crime like this. He was

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2252

someone who was gullible in a lot of ways.

He was someone who needed money. He was on

the run when he was concerned and he was

someone that could be used. And he was used,

and being used, he was told only what he

needed to know. Because that's the way those

things operate. Once he came under the

control of this fellow, he would be told

where to go, what to do, only what he needed

to know.

He bought the wrong gun. He bought

a 243 Winchester. Raul said, no, he wanted

a 30-06. He pointed it out to him in a

brochure and he went back and got it. The

very fact that he bought a gun and then went

around and immediately exchanged it indicates

that somebody is involved, somebody is

controlling him or telling him to do

something. So he did that.

Yes, he heard about the

assassination on the radio, heard it on the

car radio. He came back around to go to park

the car on South Main Street the way Raul

instructed him. At the time he came back

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2253

around, the police were all over the place.

He is an escaped convict. He is not thinking

of Martin Luther King or anything else. He

is thinking of being an escaped convict and

being stopped. So he takes off. That's

exactly what he did. He took off.

And he did hear about this on the

radio. The more he drove, the more he

listened to the radio, the more he realized

he was in serious trouble.

One of the problems James Earl Ray

faced and lawyers for him faced was the fact

that he was a classic con. If he believed

someone was trying to help him, he wouldn't

tell, he wouldn't name that person, wouldn't

tell you who the person was. By my view, he

mistakenly believed he was being helped,

particularly when he was in Canada. But he

would never tell us who was assisting him

because he thought these were people who were

legitimately trying to help him and he was

not going to rat on them.

When he was captured after one

prison escape and he was asked continually to

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2254

explain how he got out, how he managed to get

away, he refused to tell them. When I pushed

him on it, how did it happen, he said, well,

the guard was asleep, the guard fell asleep.

I said, why didn't you tell me that? He

said, no, no, I might need him again another

day. Even in that case he wouldn't tell.

So Ray was that kind of character.

I looked at him from 1978 to 1988, only began

to represent him in 1988. Ten years after I

started on this case I consented to represent

James Earl Ray when I became totally

convinced after ten years of looking at the

evidence that he had no knowing involvement.

He pled guilty because that was the

thing to do. Mr. Garrison read to you the

response to the judge. What he left out was

the fact that Ray said, yes, legally guilty,

legally guilty. He was legally because he

was copping a plea, so he was legally

guilty. He never confessed. The media has

always said he confessed, the confessed

killer. He never confessed.

He always insisted that he didn't do

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2255

it, always wanted a trial. When he fired the

Haynes, Foreman came in. December 18th

Foreman came on this case, formally into

Memphis for the first time for a hearing.

Two p.m. that afternoon Foreman's local

counsel was in meeting with the prosecutor.

Two p.m., December 18th, we have the minutes

of the meeting, the local attorney was

meeting with the prosecutor, Canale, to start

plea-bargaining negotiations. Imagine that,

without any knowledge of Ray at all.

On February 21 he was writing to his

brother that I expect a trial to start

perhaps in April. That late they had been

stitching him up all that time beforehand.

Finally Foreman comes down on him and says

that you've got to plead guilty, they are

going to fry your ass, they convicted you in

the paper, they are going to send your father

back where he was a parole violator forty

years ago, they are going to harass the rest

of your family and, besides, Foreman said,

I'm not in good health and I can't give you

your best defense.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2256

That was the thing that James said

always, he had to get rid of that lawyer and

didn't think the judge would change him, so

he said to him to plead, which he did on

March 10th, and then I'll get a new trial.

The motion was denied on March 13th, and he

tried ever since.

He filed motions. The judge died.

Judge Battle died with his head on James Earl

Ray's application for a new trial, died in

his chambers with his head on those papers at

the end of March. James was denied that

trial.

When a sitting judge dies, normally

such a case when a motion is pending, it is

granted. There were two motions pending

before that judge. One was granted. One was

not. James Earl Ray remained in prison.

I mean, I didn't intend to belabor

Mr. Ray's innocence, but I believe firmly he

is innocent, he was an unknowing patsy in

this case and he was used.

As far as Ms. Spates' testimony, I

did refer to it earlier. The statement that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2257

you heard read under oath in her deposition

were paragraphs specifically from an

affidavit that she had given subsequently to

her interview by the TBI and the Attorney

General's Office here. And from what she

told me, that was a horrifically-pressured

interview that they gave her, was distorted,

inaccurate, untruthful, and that's why she

gave that other story. And she reluctantly

put Mr. Jowers right in the middle of it.

Now, having said all of that,

Mr. Garrison is quite right, you can read the

Attorney General's report. Take a look at

it. Remember one thing when you take a look

at it. The man who headed that investigation

sat there. He was one of the witnesses

Mr. Garrison called that we were able to

examine before the Court of Appeals said you

are not going to talk to any of those

people.

Mr. Glankler sat in that chair. I

just gave him a sampling of names, gave him

twenty-three names. Do you recall that? I

asked him if he interviewed these people in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2258

his investigation, these witnesses with vital

evidence that you've heard, twenty-three.

Do you know how many he actually

interviewed? I recall I think it was two.

That's the investigation the Attorney

General's Office did. That just speaks for

itself, in my view. So I would look at the

report in that kind of context.

As to the House Select Committee

investigation, Representative Fountroy is

very uncomfortable with the results of that

investigation, very unhappy, has been for a

number of years. He has indicated that they

didn't have enough time, they could have

perhaps done better if they had more time.

At other times he said the staff he thinks

misled them. Fountroy was never happy with

the results of that investigation. And I

think he has made that quite clear.

Raul, the evidence on Raul speaks

for itself. Mr. Jowers himself has

identified Raul. Mr. Jowers identified

Raul from the spread of photographs that I

showed him when Dexter King and I met. He

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2259

knows who Raul was. He identified him as

the man who came into the restaurant who

Liberto sent in.

Now, one thing Mr. Garrison and I do

agree on -- we agree on a lot of things,

actually, but one thing in particular is that

Mr. Jowers is a small part of this whole

thing. He owned this cafe, and he did have a

debt, an obligation, to Mr. Liberto, and he

was prevailed upon to become involved in this

assassination. He didn't go out looking for

it. He was prevailed upon to be involved.

I'm not really certain about how

much money he got for his involvement. I

think he got a substantial amount of money.

I think that is what the stove money was all

about. But I'm not certain of that. We will

never know that, I suppose.

Mr. Jowers has unburdened himself to

the King family. He has -- it is late in his

life. And for whatever reason, he has come

forward and he has, as Mr. Garrison has told

you, voluntarily told elements of the story.

We believe that that is what he has done.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2260

He has just told elements of the

story protecting himself to the extent that

he can because he is worried about being

ultimately indicted. We think foolishly so

because we don't think there is any interest

in that, but that is his fear.

What, however, we don't believe is

that Mr. Jowers was unknowingly involved.

We've put into evidence the Prime Time Live

interview with Sam Donaldson, and in that

interview and in the transcript of that it is

very clear -- he tells different nuances of

the story, but it is very clear that he knew

what was going on, he knew what was

happening.

Both Ambassador Young and Dexter

King have said the one thing they didn't

believe about him is when he said he didn't

know. You can understand why he would say

that, because he is talking to the son of

Martin Luther King, Jr., the son of the

victim is sitting right in front of him. How

does he -- with eyes together how does he

say, I knew, I was a part of this, I was a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2261

knowing part of it? So he said, I don't

know. We just don't believe that.

And we believe the evidence of Bill

Hamblin, who said McCraw told him what

happened to that rifle, but he told him when

he was drunk over a period of fifteen years

each time. It might be very right that

McCraw would lie when he was sober. But when

he was drunk, Hamblin said, you may recall,

he was straight, he told him the truth, and

he told him the same detail again and again

and again. If he had been sober and he would

tell him one story and then another, then you

would say there was some prevarication, maybe

it was not true, but Hamblin said it was the

same story again and again and again but only

would discuss it when he was intoxicated.

On the basis of all of that, we

believe that Mr. Hamblin is telling the

truth, that that murder weapon is at the

bottom of the Mississippi River where it was

thrown by Mr. McCraw.

So that is basically it, ladies and

gentlemen. I think that you have to keep in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2262

mind that no matter how small the part

Mr. Jowers played in this whole sorry

episode, he nonetheless played a part and is

a conspirator. He is guilty, libel in this

court. He is libel in this court of

conspiracy because he was involved.

Irrespective of James Earl Ray, and

I believe in respect of James' memory -- he

is not here to defend himself, but I had to

give you information about him -- but

irrespective of that, even if you found that

James was involved and up to his neck, that

does not absolve Mr. Loyd Jowers, neither

does it absolve the governments and the

government agents who have been involved in

this case.

So a verdict of an existence of

conspiracy, as Mr. Garrison said, quite

rightly, does mean that there is a

conspiracy, and it involves all of the

elements that you have seen here today, and

the award of damages, nominal though it is,

is to be -- is also to be a part of your

verdict.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2263

Thank you very much. Once again,

please, we're asking you to send this message

from this courtroom across the land. Though

they will not know the details of what you

have heard probably ever, unless researchers

want to come in and read all of this, they

will not be able at least to suppress the

mighty Whirlitzer sound of your verdict.

That's the message that we ask you

to send from this courtroom to the rest of

this country and indeed the world who are

concerned about the assassination of Martin

Luther King and his loss to civilized

mankind.

Thank you.

THE COURT: All right. Ladies

and gentlemen, in this case the plaintiffs,

Coretta Scott King, Martin Luther King, III,

Bernice King, Dexter Scott King and Yolonda

King have sued Loyd Jowers and other unknown

conspirators alleging that the defendant

Jowers was a participant in a conspiracy to

do harm, and that as a result of that

conspiracy that harm was done to Dr. Martin

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2264

Luther King, that is, that he was killed in

the process.

To that, the Defendant Loyd Jowers,

has pleaded not guilty or said he is not

guilty of the things alleged. In the

alternative, Mr. Jowers has also alleged that

if he was involved, it was a very minute or

small part of the conspiracy and that in

addition to his conduct, that there was also

additional participants, namely James Earl

Ray, the Government of the United States of

America, the Government of the State of

Tennessee, City of Memphis, the Memphis

Police Department, the Government of Shelby

County, Tennessee, and that his was only a

minor part, and he also alleges that there

was participation on the part of Frank

Liberto and Earl Clark.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, I'll give

you my instructions, which you should

consider when you are deliberating. You are

to decide this case only from the evidence

which was presented at this trial. The

evidence consists of the sworn testimony of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2265

the witnesses who have testified, both in

person and by deposition, the exhibits that

were received and marked as evidence, any

facts to which all the lawyers have agreed

are stipulated and any other matters that I

have instructed you to consider.

There are two kinds of evidence:

Direct and circumstantial. Direct evidence

is direct proof of a fact such as testimony

of a witness about what the witness

personally observed. Circumstantial evidence

is indirect evidence that gives you clues

about what happened.

Circumstantial evidence is proof of

a factor a group of facts that causes you to

conclude that another fact exists. It is for

you to decide whether a fact has been proved

by circumstantial evidence.

If you base your decision upon

circumstantial evidence, you must be

convinced that the conclusion you reach is

more probable than any other explanation.

For example, if a witness testifies

that a witness saw it raining outside, that

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2266

would be direct evidence that it was

raining. If a witness testifies that the

witness saw someone enter the room wearing a

raincoat covered with drops of water carrying

a wet umbrella, that would be circumstantial

evidence from which you could conclude that

it was raining.

You are to consider both direct and

circumstantial evidence. The law permits you

to give equal weight to both, but it is for

you to decide how much weight to give any

evidence in making your decision.

You must consider all of the

evidence in light of reason, experience and

common sense. Although you must consider all

of the evidence, you are not required to

accept all of the evidence as true or

accurate.

You should not decide an issue by

the simple process of counting the number of

witnesses who have testified on either side.

You must consider all of the evidence in the

case. You may decide that the testimony of a

few witnesses on one side is more convincing

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2267

than the testimony of more witnesses on the

other side.

Certain testimony has been presented

by deposition. A deposition is testimony

taken under oath before the trial and

preserved in writing or on videotape. You

are to consider that testimony as if it had

been given in court. You are the sole and

exclusive judges of the credibility or

believability of the witnesses who have

testified in this case.

You must decide which witnesses you

believe and how important you think their

testimony is. You are not required to accept

or reject everything a witness says. You are

free to believe all, none or part of any

testimony.

In deciding which testimony you

believe, you should rely on your common sense

and every-day experience. There is no fixed

set of rules to use in deciding whether you

believe a witness, but it may help you to

think about the following questions: Was the

witness able to see, hear or be aware of the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2268

things about which the witness testified?

How well was the witness able to recall and

describe these things? How long was the

witness watching or listening? Was the

witness distracted in any way?

Did the witness have a good memory?

How did the witness look and act while

testifying? Was the witness making an honest

effort to tell the truth or did the witness

evade questions? Did the witness have any

interest in the outcome of the case? Did the

witness have any motive, bias or prejudice

that would influence the witness' testimony?

How reasonable was the witness'

testimony when you considered all of the

evidence in the case? Was the witness'

testimony contradicted by what the witness

has said or done at another time or the

testimony of other witnesses or by other

evidence? Has there been evidence regarding

the witness' intelligence, respectability or

reputation for truthfulness? Has the

witness' testimony been influenced by any

promise, threat or suggestion and did the

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2269

witness admit that any part of the witness'

testimony was not true.

There may be discrepancies or

differences within a witness' testimony or

between the testimony of different

witnesses. This does not necessarily mean

that a witness should be disbelieved.

Sometimes when two people observe an

event, they will see or hear it differently.

Sometimes a witness may have a lapse of

memory. Witnesses may testify honestly but

simply may be wrong about what they thought

they saw or remembered.

You should consider whether a

discrepancy relates to an important fact or

only to an unimportant detail. Usually

witnesses are permitted to testify as --

usually witnesses are not permitted to

testify as to opinions or to conclusions.

However, a witness who has scientific,

technical or other specialized knowledge,

skill, experience, training or education may

be permitted to give testimony in the form of

opinions. Those witnesses are often referred

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2270

to as expert witnesses.

You may remember that Judge Joe

Brown came in and was qualified as an expert

in firearms. You should determine the weight

that should be given to an expert opinion.

You should consider the education,

qualification and experience of the witness

and the credibility of the witness and the

facts relied upon by the witness to support

the opinion and the reasoning used by the

witness to arrive at the opinion.

You should consider each expert

opinion and give it the weight, if any, that

you think it deserves. You are not required

to accept the opinion of any expert.

The defendant in this case, Loyd

Jowers, is accused of conspiracy. Conspiracy

is an agreement to perform an illegal act.

In order to establish an action for civil

conspiracy, there must be a combination

between two or more persons to accomplish by

concert an unlawful purpose or to accomplish

a purpose not in itself unlawful by unlawful

means.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2271

In connection with concerted action,

it is not essential that each conspirator had

knowledge of all the details of the

conspiracy, but there must be an overt act.

When this act occurs, it is not necessary

that the party is aware of the nature of the

harm to be done or the person against whom

the harm will be done. It is not a defense

that someone else may have played a greater

part than another.

Neither is it your responsibility to

identify other co-conspirators if you find

that they do exist. It is no defense that

someone else might have played a role or

possibly a greater role than Loyd Jowers.

Also remember the question is not

whether Loyd Jowers conspired with James Earl

Ray. The question is did Jowers conspire

with anyone in a scheme that brought harm to

Dr. Martin Luther King.

In this case suit has been brought

for damages alleging that an illegal act

occurred causing the death of Dr. Martin

Luther King. In this action the plaintiff

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2272

has the burden of establishing by a

preponderance of evidence all of the facts

necessary to prove the following issue: That

is, that Loyd Jowers conspired with others

who are not parties to this action to commit

an act which resulted in the harm to Dr.

Martin Luther King.

The term "preponderance of the

evidence" means that amount of evidence that

causes you to conclude that an allegation is

probably true. To prove an allegation by a

preponderance of evidence, a party must

convince you that the allegation is more

likely true than not true.

If the evidence on a particular

issue is equally balanced, that issue has not

been proved by a preponderance of the

evidence and the party has the burden of

proving that issue -- the party that has the

burden of proving that issue has failed.

You must consider all of the

evidence on each issue. A stipulation is an

agreement. If the parties have stipulated

that certain matters of fact are true, they

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2273

are bound by this -- if they so stipulate,

they are bound by this agreement, and in your

consideration of the evidence, you are to

treat these facts as proved.

The parties have stipulated that

should you find that they are entitled to

recover in this case, that the dollar amount

should not exceed one hundred dollars.

Members of the jury, now that you

have heard all of the evidence and the

arguments of the lawyers, it is my duty to

instruct you on the law that applies in this

case. It is your duty to find the facts from

all of the evidence in the case.

After you determine the facts, you

must apply the law that has been given to you

whether you agree with it or not. You must

not be influenced by any personal likes or

dislikes, prejudice or sympathy. You must

decide the case solely on the evidence before

you and according to the law that is given to

you.

All of the instructions are equally

important. The order in which these

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2274

instructions are given has no significance.

You must follow all of the instructions and

not single out some and ignore the others.

In reaching your verdict, you may

consider only the evidence that was

admitted. Remember that any questions or

objections, statements or arguments by the

attorneys during the trial are not evidence.

If the attorneys have stipulated or agreed to

any fact, however, you will regard that fact

as having been proved.

The testimony that you've been

instructed to disregard is not evidence and

must not be considered. If evidence has been

received only for a limited purpose, you must

follow the limited instructions you were

given.

Although you must only consider the

evidence in this case in reaching your

verdict, you are not required to set aside

your common knowledge. You are permitted to

weigh the evidence in light of your common

sense, observations and experiences.

The Court has given you various

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2275

rules of law to help guide you to a just and

lawful verdict. Whether some of these

instructions will apply will depend upon what

you decide are the facts.

The Court's instructions on any

subject, including the instructions on

damages, must not be taken by you to indicate

the Court's opinion or the facts that you

should find or the verdict you should

return.

You have taken notes during the

trial. Once you retire to the jury room, you

may refer to your notes, but only to refresh

your own memory of the witness' testimony.

You are free to discuss the

testimony of the witnesses with your fellow

jurors, but each of you must rely on your own

individual memory as to what a witness did or

did not say.

In discussing the testimony, you may

not read your notes to fellow jurors or

otherwise tell them what you have written.

You should never use your notes to persuade

or influence other jurors. Your notes are

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2276

not evidence. Your notes should carry no

more weight than the unrecorded recollection

of another juror.

Your attitude and conduct at the

beginning of your deliberations are very

important. It is rarely productive for a

juror to immediately announce a determination

to hold firm for a certain verdict before any

deliberations or discussions take place.

Taking that position might make it

difficult for you to consider the opinions of

other fellow jurors or change your mind even

if you later decide that you might be wrong.

Please remember that you are not

advocates for one party or another. You are

the judges of the facts in this case. Each

of you should deliberate and vote on each

issue to be decided. Before you return your

verdict, however, each of you must agree on

the verdict to be reached so that each of you

will be able to state truthfully that the

verdict is yours.

The verdict you return to the Court

must represent the considered judgment of

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2277

each juror. In order to return a verdict, it

is necessary that each juror agree that your

verdict must be unanimous.

It is your duty to consult with one

another and to reach an agreement if you can

do so without violence to individual

judgment.

Each of you must decide the case for

yourself, but do so only after an impartial

consideration of the evidence with your

fellow jurors.

In the course of your deliberations,

do not hesitate to reexamine your own views

and to change your opinion if you are

convinced that it is not correct. But do not

surrender your honest conviction as to the

weight or effect of the evidence solely

because of the opinion of your fellow jurors

or for the purpose of returning a verdict.

If a question arises during

deliberations and you need further

instructions, please print the question on a

sheet of paper, knock on the door of the jury

room and give the question to my court

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2278

deputy. I'll read the question and I may

call you back into the court to try to help

you. Please understand that I may only

answer questions about the law and I cannot

answer questions about the evidence.

For your benefit, I have prepared a

jury verdict sheet. Let me remind you that

although certainly the life of Dr. Martin

Luther King would certainly be more than a

hundred dollars, you are not called upon to

assess a real value in this case. The

parties are only seeking nominal damages.

So that if you find at all for the

plaintiffs, again I'll remind you that you

cannot award any more than what they are

asking for.

Now, in the Circuit Court, it is a

court of unlimited jurisdiction, and there is

no limit to the amount that can be recovered,

millions, whatever, but you can in any case

only award the amount that is being asked or

less. You can never give more than the party

has asked for. So remember that there is a

one hundred dollar limit on the request in

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2279

this case.

The jury verdict reads as follows:

Did Loyd Jowers participate in a conspiracy

to do harm to Dr. Martin Luther King? And

there is a space for you to answer yes or

no.

I have an additional question: Do

you also find -- assuming that your answer to

the first one is yes, and I'm not suggesting

an answer to that one, but should -- if you

find that the first one is no, then that's

the end of your deliberations. But if your

answer to the first question is yes, then the

question is asked, do you also find that

others, including governmental agencies, were

parties to this conspiracy as alleged by the

defendant? Again, there are places for you

to answer yes or no.

And a third question is put to you:

What is the total amount of damages to be

awarded to the plaintiffs Coretta Scott King,

Martin Luther King, III, Bernice King, Dexter

Scott King and Yolonda King? There is a

blank here where if you would find for them,

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2280

again I'll remind you that the total amount

should not exceed four hundred dollars.

Anything further?

MR. GARRISON: I have nothing

further, Your Honor.

THE COURT: All right, ladies

and gentlemen. You will now retire and

select one of you to be the presiding juror

for your deliberations.

As soon as all of you have agreed

upon a verdict, you will sign the verdict

form and return with it to this courtroom.

You may deliberate only when all of

you are present in the jury room. And you

may not resume your deliberations after any

break until all of you have returned to the

jury room, that is to say, you can never

discuss the case in splintered groups but

only when you are -- when all of you are

together and deliberateing.

The other thing that I must do at

this time, regretfully, is to take the

alternates. The alternates will not be

allowed to deliberate with you. We normally

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2281

excuse them at this time. But I am going

to -- I'm requesting that you remain here but

do not speak to the -- do not discuss the

case during the deliberations, but I want you

to remain until the final verdict has been

returned. There is still the possibility

that you -- we hope that it doesn't happen,

but there is always the possibility you might

have to enter into the deliberation. So we

ask you to please stay but do not discuss the

case with anyone. Do you understand?

All right. Anything further?

MR. GARRISON: Can we approach

the bench just a moment?

(Bench conference outside the

presence of the court reporter.)

THE COURT: All right. Would

the alternates come up here.

(The two alternate jurors approached

the bench for a conference outside the

presence of the court reporter.)

THE COURT: All right. Ladies

and gentlemen, during the course of the trial

there were certain exhibits that were

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2282

presented. These exhibits will be available

to you if you find that they would help you

in your deliberations, all but the deposition

testimony. We will not allow the depositions

to go back, but any of the other exhibits you

may have.

All right. You may now retire.

(Jury out.)

(The jury began its

deliberations at 12:32 p.m.)

THE COURT: All right. We have

absolutely no idea what the jury is going to

did or how long it is going to take them to

do. I don't know whether or not they are

going to want to take a break before they get

into their serious deliberations. I'm going

to ask you all to stay close. If you must go

someplace, let he the deputy or someone know

where were can reach you.

(The Court stood in recess until

3:02 p.m.)

THE COURT: I understand the

jury has reached a verdict. I'm going to

bring them out. They've indicated that they

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2283

want a picture of themselves. So I'm

authorizing this gentleman to take one

picture. He is going to make sure there are

no additional copies. I'll have copies made

of them and send them to the jurors.

(Jury in.)

THE COURT: All right, ladies

and gentlemen. I understand you reached a

verdict. Is that correct?

THE JURY: Yes (In unison).

THE COURT: May I have that

verdict.

(Verdict form passed to the

Court.)

THE COURT: I have authorized

this gentleman here to take one picture of

you which I'm going to have developed and

make copies and send to you as I promised.

Okay. All right, ladies and

gentlemen. Let me ask you, do all of you

agree with this verdict?

THE JURY: Yes (In unison).

THE COURT: In answer to the

question did Loyd Jowers participate in a

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2284

conspiracy to do harm to Dr. Martin Luther

King, your answer is yes. Do you also find

that others, including governmental agencies,

were parties to this conspiracy as alleged by

the defendant? Your answer to that one is

also yes. And the total amount of damages

you find for the plaintiffs entitled to is

one hundred dollars. Is that your verdict?

THE JURY: Yes (In unison).

THE COURT: All right. I want

to thank you ladies and gentlemen for your

participation. It lasted a lot longer than

we had originally predicted. In spite of

that, you hung in there and you took your

notes and you were alert all during the

trial. And we appreciate it. We want you to

note that our courts cannot function if we

don't have jurors who accept their

responsibility such as you have.

I hope it has been a pleasant

experience for you and that when you go back

home you'll tend tell your friends and

neighbors when they get that letter saying

they've been summoned for jury duty, don't

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2285

try to think of up those little old lies,

just come on down and it is not so bad after

all.

I know how much you regret the fact

that you won't be able to come back for the

next ten years. I don't know, I may or may

not recognize you if I see you on the street

some day, but if you would see me and

recognize me, I sure would appreciate you

coming up and reminding me of your service

here.

To remind you of your service, we

have some certificates that we have prepared

for you. They look real good in a frame.

Not only will they remind you of your service

here, but they will remind you also of that

wonderful judge who presided over this. We

do thank you very much on behalf of everyone

who has participated in this trial.

You were directed not to discuss the

case when you were first sworn. Now that

your verdict has been reached, I'm going to

relieve you of that oath, meaning that you

may or may not discuss it. It is up to you.

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2286

No one can force you to. And if you discuss

it, it will only be because you decide that

you wanted to.

I guess that's about all except that

I want to come around there and personally

shake your hand. You are what I would call

Trojans.

Having said that, as soon as I get

around there and get a chance to shake your

hands, you'll be dismissed.

(Judge Swearengen left the bench

to shake the jurors hands.)

THE COURT: Those of you who

would like to retain your notes, you may do

so if you want to.

I guess that's about it. So

consider yourselves dismissed and we thank

you again.

Ladies and gentlemen, Court is

adjourned.

(The proceedings were concluded

at 3:10 p.m. on December 8th, 1999.)

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2287

COURT REPORTERS' CERTIFICATE

STATE OF TENNESSEE:

COUNTY OF SHELBY:

We, BRIAN F. DOMINSKI, MARGIE

DAUSTER, SARA ROGAN, KRISTEN PETERSON and

SHERYL WEATHERFORD, Reporters and Notaries

Public, Shelby County, Tennessee, CERTIFY:

1. The foregoing proceedings were

taken before us at the time and place stated

in the foregoing styled cause with the

appearances as noted;

2. Being Court Reporters, we then

reported the proceedings in Stenotype to the

best of our skill and ability, and the

foregoing pages contain a full, true and

correct transcript of our said Stenotype

notes then and there taken;

3. We am not in the employ of and

are not related to any of the parties or

their counsel, and we have no interest in the

matter involved.

WITNESS OUR SIGNATURES, this, the

____ day of ___________, 2000.

___________________________

BRIAN F. DOMINSKI

Certificate of Merit

Holder; Registered

Professional Reporter,

Notary Public for

the State of Tennessee at

Large ***

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999

2288

___________________________

MARGIE ROUTHEAUX

Registered

Professional Reporter,

Notary Public for

the State of Tennessee at

Large ***

___________________________

SARA ROGAN

Registered

Professional Reporter,

Notary Public for

the State of Tennessee at

Large ***

___________________________

KRISTIN PETERSON

Court Reporter,

Notary Public for

the State of Tennessee at

Large ***

___________________________

SHERYL G. WEATHERFORD

Registered

Professional Reporter,

Notary Public for

the State of Tennessee at

Large ***

DANIEL, DILLINGER, DOMINSKI, RICHBERGER, WEATHERFORD

(901) 529-1999