no_title

THE STATUS OF WOMEN IN AGRIFOOD SYSTEMS OVERVIEW

Front cover image: NIGER

- A man and a woman work

together to remove nuts

from a drying machine.

2

GROW LET'S

EQUALITY

OVERVIEW THE STATUS OF WOMEN IN AGRIFOOD SYSTEMS

Agrifood systems are a major employer of

Despite the importance of agrifood systems

women globally and constitute a more

for women’s livelihoods and the welfare of

important source of livelihood for women

their families, women’s roles tend to be

than for men in many countries. Empowering

marginalized and their working conditions

are likely to be worse than men’s – irregular,

women and closing gender gaps in agrifood

informal, part-time, low-skilled, labour-

systems thus enhances the well-being of

intensive and thus vulnerable. Women also

women and their households, reducing hunger,

boosting incomes and strengthening resilience.

have higher burdens of unpaid care, limiting

This report provides a comprehensive overview

their opportunities for education and

of the status of women in agrifood systems. It

employment. This is true both for women

analyses the multiple sources of inequality

working in primary agricultural production,

that constrain their participation, well-being

with wages and productivity systematically

and empowerment; describes policies and

lower than those of men, and for women

approaches that have supported gender equality

working in off-farm segments of agrifood

and women’s empowerment; and details how

systems, where their work is mostly in lower-

women’s equal participation in agrifood

value nodes. Women may not be systematically

systems can transform individual and global

excluded from high-value, export-oriented

outcomes.

value chains or from entrepreneurship in

agrifood systems, but their participation is

usually constrained by discriminatory social

© FAO/Jafaar Al Merei

OVERVIEW

Discriminatory social norms and rules

norms and barriers to knowledge, assets,

↑ SYRIAN ARAB

REPUBLIC -

affecting women and girls are at the heart of

resources and social networks.

A woman, after

gender inequality and are slow to change.

collecting figs,

her only source of

Women’s access to land, inputs, services,

Attitudes towards women's work outside the

livelihood, dries

finance and digital technology – which is

home, the acceptability of gender-based

them in the sun.

key to working in agrifood systems –

violence and other norms affecting women's

continues to lag behind men’s. In many

livelihoods in agrifood systems remain

countries there still is much to do to ensure

dangerously restrictive in much of the world.

that women own land in equal proportion to

Formal policies and strategies may increasingly

men and that legal frameworks protect their

identify the constraints and inequalities that

rights. It is alarming how little the gaps in

women face, but few national policies specify

women’s access to extension and irrigation

objectives to address them. This is despite the

and ownership of livestock have closed over

evidence that a broader approach to women’s

the past decade, although it is encouraging

empowerment – reducing the barriers to their

that gaps in their access to financial services,

participation and changing the norms and

mobile internet and mobile phones are

rules that constrain it – has great benefits for

narrowing.

women’s well-being and for wider society as

a whole. Such an approach also has substantial

co-benefits for women’s livelihoods, earnings,

health and nutrition of their children.

THE STATUS OF WOMEN IN AGRIFOOD SYSTEMS

Women’s work in agrifood systems

Coping mechanisms and resilience to shocks

and stressors are shaped by gender inequalities,

and shocks and crises have a greater negative

Agrifood systems are a major employer of

impact on women’s livelihoods in agrifood

women. Globally, 36 percent of working women

systems than they do on men’s. During the

and 38 percent of working men work in agrifood

COVID-19 pandemic, women’s food insecurity

systems as of 2019. For both women and men,

rose faster than men’s, and job losses in both

this represents a decline of about 10 percentage

primary agricultural production and off-farm

points since 2005, driven almost exclusively

segments of the agrifood systems were much

by a reduction in employment in primary

more pronounced for women than for men.

agricultural production.

Women were called on to draw down their more

Agrifood systems are a more

limited assets and savings more quickly than

important source of livelihood

were men. During climate shocks, women’s

for women than for men in many

more limited resources and assets constrain

AGRIFOOD SYSTEMS ARE A MORE IMPORTANT SOURCE OF LIVELIHOOD FOR WOMEN THAN FOR MEN IN MANY COUNTRIES.

countries. In sub-Saharan Africa,

their adaptive capacity and resilience.

66 percent of women’s

These challenges to women’s full and equal

employment is in agrifood

employment in agrifood systems hold back

systems, compared with 60

their productivity and sustain wage gaps.

percent of men’s. In southern Asia,

Closing the gender gap in farm productivity

women overwhelmingly work in

and the wage gap in agrifood systems would

agrifood systems (71 percent of

increase global gross domestic product by 1

women, versus 47 percent of men),

percent (or nearly USD 1 trillion). This would

although fewer women than men

reduce global food insecurity by about 2

are in the labour force. Agrifood

percentage points, reducing the number of

systems are a key source of

food-insecure people by 45 million.

employment for young women,

especially those aged 15–24.

Women’s empowerment is also key to

economic and social outcomes. Benefits from

In general, women account for

a greater share of agricultural

projects that empower women are higher than

employment at lower levels of

those that just mainstream gender. More than

economic development, as inadequate

half of bilateral finance for agriculture and

education, limited access to basic

rural development already mainstreams gender,

infrastructure and markets, high unpaid-

but only 6 percent treats gender as fundamental.

work burden and poor rural employment

If half of small-scale producers benefited from

opportunities outside agriculture severely

development interventions that focused on

limit women’s opportunities for off-farm

empowering women, it would significantly

work. Women make up well over 50 percent of

raise the incomes of an additional 58 million

people and increase the resilience of an

the agricultural labour force in many sub-

additional 235 million people.

Saharan African countries. About half of the

labour force in agriculture is female in several

countries in Southeast Asia, including

Cambodia, the Lao People’s Democratic

Republic and Viet Nam.

Women who work in agricultural production

tend to do so under highly unfavourable

conditions. They tend to be concentrated in

©FAO Peru

the poorest countries, where alternative

livelihoods are not available, and they maintain

the intensity of their work in conditions of

climate-induced weather shocks and in

situations of conflict. Women are less likely to

children and other family members and the

↑ PERU – A rural woman

in the field tending her

participate as entrepreneurs and independent

implications of this burden for women’s time

crops.

farmers and are engaged in the production of

and employment.

less lucrative crops. Often, women are unpaid

family workers or casual workers in agriculture.

Women’s access to assets, services and resources

Social norms may also constrain women from

producing crops and participating in activities

dominated by men. The gender gap in land

Women’s access to assets and resources key

productivity between female- and male-

to agrifood systems – such as land, inputs,

managed farms of the same size is 24 percent.

services, finance and digital technology –

On average, women earn 18.4 percent less than

OVERVIEW

continues to lag behind men’s. Gaps directly

men in wage employment in agriculture; this

means that women receive 82 cents for every

related to agricultural production remain

dollar earned by men.

substantial, but gender gaps in education,

finance and information and communications

Moving from primary agricultural production

technology, which are particularly important

to off-farm work in agrifood systems has

for developing off-farm businesses and

historically led to improved livelihoods for

employment opportunities in agrifood systems,

both women and men. However, the roles of

are closing more quickly. Nevertheless,

women in off-farm work in agrifood systems

sustained, quality access to assets and resources

are more likely to be in less profitable value

remains a challenge.

chains and activities or on worse terms

than those of men due to restrictive

Women in agricultural households remain

traditional social norms or poor access to

significantly disadvantaged in landownership

assets and resources.

compared with men; half the countries

reporting on Sustainable Development Goal

Women’s greater burden of unpaid domestic

Indicator 5.a.2 have weak legal protections

and care work, such as cleaning, cooking and

for women’s land rights. The percentage of

caring for household members, contributes

men who have ownership or secure tenure

to inequalities in labour-market participation

rights over agricultural land is twice that of

and outcomes. This is particularly evident in

women in more than 40 percent of the countries

low- and middle-income countries. In rural

that have reported on women’s landownership

areas, women’s unpaid-work burden is greater

(Sustainable Development Goal Indicator 5.a.1),

than that of men in large part because of the

and a larger percentage of men than women

time they spend collecting water. The COVID-19

have such rights in 40 of 46 countries reporting.

pandemic underscored the disproportionate

Even so, the share of women among landowners

burden women shoulder in unpaid care of

increased in 10 of 18 countries over the last

THE STATUS OF WOMEN IN AGRIFOOD SYSTEMS

decade, with marked improvements in several

systems (as sellers, employers or employees)

countries in sub-Saharan Africa and southern

and affects their ability to access and benefit

Asia.

from services, technologies and rural

organizations.

Progress has been slow in closing gaps in

women’s access to irrigation and in ownership

Advancing gender equality and women’s

of livestock. On average, men own more

empowerment is critical to women’s well-

being and to society at large and thus has

livestock than do women and are more likely

intrinsic value. Significant advances in

than women to own large livestock such as

cattle. These gaps have changed little in the

measuring women’s empowerment in agrifood

last decade, although gaps in ownership of

systems over the past decade show that

smaller species such as sheep and poultry tend

women’s empowerment has a positive impact

to be narrower.

on agricultural production, food security, diets

and child nutrition.

Women in agriculture still have significantly

less access than men to inputs, including

Addressing gender equality and women’s

improved seeds, fertilizers and mechanized

empowerment means addressing constraining

equipment. On a positive note, the gender gap

social norms and rigid gender roles affecting

how women participate in agrifood systems.

in access to mobile internet in low- and middle-

income countries fell from 25 percent to 16

Increasing attention has been placed on

percent between 2017 and 2021, and the gender

addressing constraints created by

gap in access to bank accounts narrowed from

discriminatory social norms and gender-blind

9 to 6 percentage points. Women are as likely

policies and laws in agrifood systems. Projects

as men to adopt new technologies when the

have increasingly aimed at increasing women’s

necessary enabling factors are put in place and

empowerment and at measuring the impact

they have equal access to complementary

of interventions on both agency and

resources.

empowerment. To do this effectively, men,

boys and community leaders must all be

↓ SRI-LANKA - A woman

engaged in gender-transformative processes.

farmer watering crops.

Agency, norms and policies

Discriminatory social norms in agrifood

systems create power imbalances between

men and women and limit the choices available

to women, who usually are more involved in

unpaid care and domestic work. Such norms

commonly restrict women’s mobility and limit

their options for non-domestic work and

market activities and their access to and control

©FAO/Ishara Kodikara

over assets and income. Gender-based

discrimination in social institutions varies by

region and country but remains unacceptably

high globally. This constrains women’s full

and productive employment in agrifood

GENDER-BASED DISCRIMINATION IN SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS VARIES BY REGION AND COUNTRY BUT REMAINS UNACCEPTABLY HIGH GLOBALLY.

The impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and

the related economic crisis have been

intensified and shaped by gender inequalities

in agrifood-system livelihoods. Globally, 22

percent of women lost their jobs in off-farm

agrifood systems work in the first year of the

pandemic, compared with only 2 percent of

men. The gap in food insecurity between men

and women widened from 1.7 percentage points

in 2019 to 4.3 percentage points in 2021.

Women’s care burden also increased: in

Honduras and Uganda, for example, lockdown

The extent to which national policy

measures increased girls’ domestic and care

frameworks address gender issues improved

burden and reduced their school attendance

over the past decade. National policies and

more than they did those of boys. The incidence

budgets in East Africa and Latin America, for

and perceptions of gender-based violence

example, have increasingly highlighted

soared, especially domestic violence and abuse

structural gaps in access to land, inputs,

against women and girls, largely as a result of

OVERVIEW

services, finance and digital technology and

intrahousehold tensions caused by lockdowns,

included efforts to produce gender-responsive

school closures and food and financial

outcomes. However, the extent to which

insecurities.

agricultural policies specifically address gender

Women often have more sensitivity to climate

equality and women’s empowerment varies.

shocks and natural disasters than do men

Even though more than 75 percent of

and have different resilience capacity. While

agricultural policies that FAO analysed

recognized women’s roles and/or challenges

women are not inherently more at risk from

in agriculture, only 19 percent had gender

climate change and shocks, resource and other

equality in agriculture or women’s rights as

constraints can make them more sensitive to

explicit policy objectives. And only 13 percent

their effects and less able to adapt to them,

encouraged rural women’s participation in the

increasing their vulnerability. For example,

policy cycle.

women’s work burdens, including hours worked

in agriculture, tend to decline less than men’s

during climate shocks such as heat stress.

Resilience and adaptation to shocks

Discriminatory gender norms limiting women’s

mobility and their ability to access extension

Coping mechanisms and resilience to shocks

services and climate information present

and stressors are shaped by gender inequalities.

further obstacles to climate adaptation. Women

Shocks and crises have a large impact on

are also often underrepresented in climate

women’s livelihoods in agrifood systems, and

policy decision-making at all levels.

these shocks and crises are multiple and often

overlapping. In many countries, these shocks

and crises occur in contexts of very high gender

inequalities.

THE STATUS OF WOMEN IN AGRIFOOD SYSTEMS

What has worked and how to move forward

Conflict and insecurity remain key drivers of

food crises and food insecurity. Women are

often more vulnerable than men to acute food

Reducing gender inequalities in livelihoods,

insecurity because they face additional risks,

access to resources and resilience in agrifood

barriers and disadvantages. Violent conflicts

systems is a critical pathway towards gender

also have gender-differentiated impacts on

equality and women’s empowerment and

mobility, gender-based violence, health and

towards more just and sustainable agrifood

education outcomes, and political and civic

systems. These improvements are possible

engagement. Conflict increases employment

in agriculture more for women than for men.

when an enabling environment exists and

However, while it reduces the working hours

interventions are well designed to tackle the

of both men and women, women’s working

multidimensional and interrelated challenges

hours are reduced less than those of men.

facing women and men.

Gender-transformative approaches show

promise in changing discriminatory norms

across a broad array of areas. Available data

indicate that such approaches are cost-effective

GENDER-TRANSFORMATIVE APPROACHES SHOW PROMISE IN CHANGING NORMS, ARE COST-EFFECTIVE AND HAVE HIGH RETURNS.

and have high returns. However, more work

is needed on developing pathways to implement

gender-transformative approaches at scale.

It is also critical to improve productivity and

close gaps related to access to assets and

resources. Interventions alleviating women’s

workloads and improving their productivity

have been particularly successful when they

address care and unpaid domestic work burdens,

strengthen women’s capacities through

education and training, improve access to

technology and resources, and strengthen

land-tenure security. Access to child care has

a large positive effect on mothers’ employment

in and returns to agrifood-system activities.

Closing the gender gaps in landownership

and secure tenure is particularly important

©FAO/Vyacheslav Oseledko

as secure land rights have multiple positive

impacts. Gaps can be narrowed through a

combination of implementing reforms on land

registration, increasing land-rights awareness

and access to community-based legal aid, and

fostering women’s participation in local land

institutions. Additionally, services (such as

©FAO/Luis Tato

Second, localized interventions which address

← KENYA - Two young

women inspect the

multiple inequalities that have been proven

health status of the local

to close gender gaps and empower women in

chickens.

agrifood systems should be carefully scaled

up, taking into consideration the local context.

While engaging with communities and

extension) and resources (such as technology)

households on gender-biased local norms

must be designed with women’s needs in mind.

through gender-transformative approaches

Digital tools and information and

remains critical, to reach scale governments,

communications technology can facilitate

international organizations, civil society

closing multiple gaps.

organizations and the private sector must

influence positive changes in gender norms

Group-based approaches are important for

and improve women’s access to resources

increasing women’s empowerment and

through national policies, campaigns and

resilience to shocks and stressors such as

large-scale integrated programmes. Only by

the COVID-19 pandemic and climate change.

reaching scale can we achieve large benefits

They encourage the uptake of technology and

for women’s well-being and significant gains

increase adaptive capacity. They can also

in economic growth and food security.

OVERVIEW

increase women’s participation in climate

Finally, interventions must be designed to

policy processes.

close gender inequalities and empower

Social protection programmes have increased

women. Interventions are more likely to bridge

women’s employment and enhanced women’s

gender gaps in agrifood systems and bring

resilience. They have facilitated climate

about positive and lasting improvements in

adaptation, improved well-being in contexts

women’s welfare when they integrate explicit

where risks from climate change are high and

actions towards gender equality and women’s

empowerment. When possible, they should

helped in the recovery from the COVID-19

pandemic and the impacts of extreme weather

use transformative approaches at community

events resulting from climate change.

and national level to address discriminatory

gender norms and attitudes. Doing so can drive

As a way forward, three elements are critical.

major improvements in incomes and resilience.

First, the collection and use of high-quality

data, disaggregated by sex, age and other

forms of social and economic differentiation,

THE INCREASE IN SEX-DISAGGREGATED DATA AND MEASUREMENT OF EMPOWERMENT ARE KEY TO EFFECTIVE PROGRAMMING AND POLICY.

and the implementation of rigorous qualitative

and quantitative gender research are

paramount for monitoring, evaluating and

accelerating progress on gender equality in

agrifood systems. Despite improvements in

the past ten years, significant gaps remain in

the availability, scope and granularity of data,

and in the evidence on what works and under

what conditions for building more inclusive

agrifood systems.

THE STATUS OF WOMEN IN AGRIFOOD SYSTEMS

NUMERICAL HIGHLIGHTS

Agrifood systems are a major employer of both women and men. Globally, 36 percent of working women are employed in agrifood systems, along with 38 percent of working men.

Agrifood systems are a more important source of livelihood for women than for men in many countries. In sub-Saharan Africa, 66 percent of women’s employment is in agrifood systems, compared with 60 percent of men’s employment. In southern Asia, 71 percent of women in the labour force work in agrifood systems versus 47 percent of men.

For both women and men, this represents a decline of about 10 percentage points since 2005, driven almost exclusively by a reduction in employment in primary agricultural production.

Globally, 21 percent of all workers in the fishery and aquaculture primary sector are women and almost 50 percent of all workers in the entire aquatic value chain (including pre- and postharvest) are women. Female workers are significantly more likely than male workers to work part-time or in other vulnerable positions.

The gender gap in land productivity between femaleand male-managed farms of the same size is 24 percent.

Women engaged in wage employment in agriculture earn 82 cents for every dollar that men earn.

Men have greater ownership or secure tenure rights over agricultural land than do women in 40 of 46 countries reporting on Sustainable Development Goal Indicator 5.a.1.

The gender gap in women’s access to mobile internet in low- and middleincome countries narrowed from 25 percent to 16 percent between 2017 and 2021, and the gender gap in access to bank accounts narrowed from 9 percentage points to 6 percentage points.

While 75 percent of policy documents relating to agriculture and rural development from 68 countries recognize women’s roles and/or women’s challenges in agriculture and rural development, only 19 percent included policy goals related to gender.

Globally, 22 percent of women lost their jobs in the off-farm segment of agrifood systems in the first year of the COVID-19 pandemic, compared with only 2 percent of men.

The gap in food insecurity between men and women widened from 1.7 percentage points in 2019 to 4.3 percentage points in 2021.

OVERVIEW

Closing the gender gap in farm productivity and the wage gap in agrifood-system employment would increase global gross domestic product by 1 percent (or nearly USD 1 trillion). This would reduce global food insecurity by about 2 percentage points, reducing the number of food-insecure people by 45 million.

If half of small-scale producers benefited from development interventions which focused on empowering women, it would significantly raise the incomes of an additional 58 million people and increase the resilience of an additional 235 million people.

©FAO/Aamir Qureshi

THE STATUS OF WOMEN IN AGRIFOOD SYSTEMS

POLICY HIGHLIGHTS

• Increasing women’s empowerment is

essential for women’s well-being and has

a positive impact on agricultural production,

food security, diets and child nutrition.

• Gender-transformative approaches to

change restrictive social norms are cost-

effective and have high returns, but more

work is needed on developing pathways to

implement gender-transformative

approaches at scale.

• Access to formal child care has a large

↑ ITALY – Two small-

scale food producers

• Enhancing women’s rights to own or have

positive effect on mothers’ employment in

from Syrian Arab

secure tenure over agricultural land has

and returns to agrifood-system activities.

Republic visit the

vegetable gardens

positive impacts on empowerment,

of the University of

• Improving women’s access to agricultural

investment, natural-resource management,

Gastronomic Sciences.

access to services and institutions,

extension is important to maximize food

resilience and food security, reducing

security and nutritional outcomes and to

gender-based violence and increasing

facilitate women’s participation across

women’s bargaining power.

agrifood systems.

INCREASING WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT IS ESSENTIAL FOR WOMEN’S WELL-BEING AND HAS A POSITIVE IMPACT ON AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION, FOOD SECURITY, DIETS AND CHILD NUTRITION.

ACCESS TO FORMAL CHILD CARE HAS A LARGE POSITIVE EFFECT ON MOTHERS’ EMPLOYMENT IN AND RETURNS TO AGRIFOOD-SYSTEM ACTIVITIES.

• Group-based approaches are important for

• The increase in efforts to collect sex-

increasing women’s empowerment and

disaggregated data and measure

resilience to shocks and stresses such as

empowerment in its multiple dimensions

the COVID-19 pandemic and climate change.

is central to improving the design and

They have also proven effective for

effectiveness of programming and policy

increasing women’s participation in climate

in terms of gender equality and

policy processes, for increasing uptake of

empowerment.

technology and increasing adaptive

• However, major gaps remain in the

capacity.

availability of sex-disaggregated data on

• Social protection programmes have

access to productive assets and services,

increased women’s employment and

climate-change adaptation and resilience,

OVERVIEW

enhanced women’s resilience. They have

and nutrition. Data and research are also

also facilitated climate adaptation, improved

limited on women and men who face

well-being in contexts where climate risk

additional inequalities due to age,

is high and helped in recovering from the

socioeconomic status, ethnicity, Indigenous

effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and

identity and remoteness.

climate shocks.

©FAO/Aamir Qureshi

REQUIRED CITATION FAO. 2023. The status of women in agrifood systems – Overview. Rome. https://doi.org/10.4060/cc5060en

©FAO/2023 CC5060EN/1/04.23