no_title

Glyphosate and cancer: Buying science

How industry strategized (and regulators colluded) in an attempt to save the world’s most widely used herbicide from a ban

Glyphosate and cancer: Buying science

How industry strategized (and regulators colluded) in an attempt to save the world’s most widely used herbicide from a ban

Pesticide Action Network Germany

By Helmut Burtscher-Schaden PhD, Peter Clausing PhD, and Claire Robinson MPhil

Also supported by:

campact

March úøùÿ

Bund für Umwelt und Natur­ schutz Deutschland (BUND) – Friends of the Earth Germany

Publisher:

AVAAZ

GLOBAL úøøø Friends of the Earth Austria Neustiftgasse ûþ ùøÿø Vienna, Austria

www.globalúøøø.at

GMWatch (UK)

Corporate Europe Observatory GMWATCH

Pesticide Action Network Europe

© úøùÿ Helmut Burtscher-Schaden, Peter Clausing und Claire Robinson

Umweltinstitut Müchen e.V.

Corresponding author:

Helmut Burtscher-Schaden, helmut.burtscher@globalúøøø.at

of the industry disagree. In recent years, a growing number of peer-reviewed studies in the published scientific literature have point­ ed to the harmful effects of glyphosate and its commercial formulations. Notably, while most industry studies indicate that glyphosate is not genotoxic (damaging to DNA), the majority of independent studies find the opposite.

Summary

In this report we show how Europe’s pesticide regulation, introduced in úøøā, threatened the survival of glyphosate herbicides, the most widely used in the world, and how industry fought back to save its chemical from a ban.

In úøùý a severe blow hit the industry when the World Health Organization’s cancer re­ search agency IARC published its verdict that glyphosate was probably carcinogenic to hu­ mans and that there was strong evidence that it was genotoxic. Glyphosate products repre­ sent a lucrative global market that is expected to cross US$ ùø billion by úøúù. So the indus­ try had to come up with a strategy to save its chemical.

Chapter ù describes the challenges that con­ fronted manufacturers of glyphosate-based herbicides in úøùú when they had to apply for re-approval in the EU of their active ingredient, glyphosate. Under the úøøā law, pesticide ac­ tive ingredients are not allowed to be market­ ed if they have the potential to cause cancer, damage DNA, or have toxic effects on repro­ duction. This is known as a hazard-based ap­ proach. It means that if the pesticide has these effects, in principle, it must be banned. The in­ herent properties of the chemical are crucial, rather than the – often difficult to predict – risk to humans under certain exposure scenarios. The reasoning that if the pesticide is properly used, people would only be exposed to “safe” doses – the “risk-based approach” – is not per­ mitted for such substances.

Monsanto and other glyphosate companies responded to these cumulative threats to their business by sponsoring scientific reviews, pub­ lished in peer-reviewed journals, which con­ clude that glyphosate and its commercial for­ mulations are not harmful to health.

In úøùþ a series of reviews with favourable con­ clusions on glyphosate’s safety (we call them the “Intertek papers”) were published in a peer-re­ viewed journal. The authors were members of the Glyphosate Expert Panel, convened by the commercial consultancy firm Intertek under commission from Monsanto. Monsanto had paid Intertek to convene and facilitate the pan­ el’s work. The specific and stated aim of the In­ tertek papers was to counter IARC’s evaluation of glyphosate. They unanimously conclude that glyphosate in humans does not harm genetic material or trigger cancer.

This change in law posed a problem for Mon­ santo and other companies that manufacture or market glyphosate herbicides, because sev­ eral of the industry’s own animal studies show statistically significant and dose-dependent carcinogenic effects from glyphosate.

Another aspect of the úøøā regulation also posed a problem for industry. In the past, the regulatory assessment of pesticide active ingre­ dients has been based on industry-sponsored studies. These are generally unpublished and are kept hidden from the public and indepen­ dent scientists on the grounds that they are commercial secrets. But the regulation man­ dated for the first time that studies from the peer-reviewed open scientific literature must be included in the dossier of documents that the industry submits to regulators in support of the approval of a pesticide.

In Chapter ú we identify nine major scientific flaws in the Intertek papers and other indus­ try-sponsored and -supported review articles on glyphosate’s health risks. Specifically, they uti­ lize manipulations such as apparently calculat­ ed omissions and the introduction of irrelevant data, confusing the picture and denying the sci­ entific evidence of glyphosate’s harmful effects.

The challenge to the pesticide companies lay in the fact that while industry studies generally conclude that glyphosate is safe for its proposed uses, many studies conducted independently

Most importantly, the authors claim to have used a “weight of evidence” approach to assess whether glyphosate is carcinogenic or not, yet in reality, they avoided such an approach.

A weight of evidence approach takes a holistic view of the different lines of evidence, namely:

fied for carcinogenicity) in ùāĀĀ.

In addition to the fact that the Intertek papers themselves were commissioned by Monsanto, many of the authors of these and other indus­ try-sponsored or industry-supported reviews have conflicts of interest with the pesticide and chemical industries. This is shown in Chapter û. Twelve of the ùþ members of the Glypho­ sate Expert Panel have served as consultants to Monsanto and/or have been employed by the company. Others have different conflicts of in­ terest with industry or industry-linked bodies, notably the International Life Sciences Institute (ILSI), an organization funded by (among oth­ ers) companies that manufacture and/or mar­ ket glyphosate products, including Monsanto, Dow, and BASF. These conflicts of interest have often not been made clear to members of the public and media.

• Animal studies

• Epidemiological data

• Possible mechanisms of carcinogenesis.

In the case of glyphosate, the different lines of evidence complement each other. For instance, the finding of a significantly increased incidence of malignant lymphoma in three mouse studies is complementary to the association between glyphosate exposure and non-Hodgkin lympho­ ma in humans. These lines of evidence are in turn supported by convincing evidence for genotox­ icity and oxidative stress as possible underlying mechanisms for cancer development.

Altogether evidence exists in all three areas of consideration. A holistic consideration of this evidence inevitably leads to the conclusion that glyphosate is carcinogenic. Instead, the Mon­ santo-sponsored authors considered the differ­ ent lines of evidence separately, used false ar­ guments, and concealed or distorted the facts, concluding that glyphosate is not carcinogenic.

Only in the case of one panel member were we unable to find any conflicts of interest, apart from her participation in the Intertek papers. In spite of all this, members of the Glyphosate Ex­ pert Panel were claimed in the Intertek papers to be independent.

The notion that glyphosate is not carcinogen­ ic has found backing in the verdicts of several regulatory agencies and expert bodies, includ­ ing BfR (Germany’s Federal Institute for Risk As­ sessment), the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), the Joint Food and Agriculture Organi­ zation/World Health Organization (FAO/WHO) Meeting on Pesticide Residues (JMPR), and the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

One episode that is not objectively addressed in the Intertek papers took place in ùāĀý, when the US EPA classified glyphosate as a possible hu­ man carcinogen. The EPA had based its verdict on a significant and dose-dependent increased inci­ dence of a rare kidney tumour in a mouse study submitted by Monsanto. But Marvin Kuschner, a consultant pathologist who was reportedly a member of Monsanto’s Biohazards Commission, re-evaluated the data and claimed to find such a tumour in a control mouse (which did not receive glyphosate), thus removing the statistically signif­ icant increase in the incidence of this tumour in glyphosate-treated animals. This finding, if con­ firmed, would have exonerated glyphosate from suspicion of causing kidney cancer.

However, the assessments of BfR and EFSA suffer from fundamental scientific weaknesses and the JMPR’s conclusions are marred by a se­ vere lack of transparency and scientific clarity, as shown in Chapter ü.

As an example of the problems with BfR’s as­ sessment, after the cancer research agency IARC found “sufficient” evidence of a carcinogenic effect of glyphosate in the same four industry studies (two studies with rats and two with mice) in which BfR had previously not been able to de­ tect any evidence of cancer activity, the German authority had to evaluate the assessments of the IARC. As a result, BfR was forced to confirm the statistically significant tumour findings noted by IARC in all four studies. Also, in the remaining

Pathologists tasked by the EPA with re-exam­ ining the original kidney sections and new sec­ tions of the same organs were unable to iden­ tify the alleged new tumour. However, four consultants commissioned by Monsanto stated that they were able to confirm Kuschner’s extra tumour. After a long back-and-forth discussion, the EPA moved glyphosate from class C (possi­ ble human carcinogen) into class D (not classi­

three mouse studies of the manufacturers, BfR had to admit the existence of statistically signifi­ cant and dose-dependent increases in tumours, which it had previously overlooked. As an expla­ nation for its colossal error, the BfR admitted that “initially”, it had “relied on the statistical evaluation provided [by the glyphosate manu­ facturers] with the study reports”.

for regulatory and expert bodies also have con­ flicts of interest with industry. For instance, the chairman of the JMPR for glyphosate, Alan Boo­ bis, was also the vice-president of ILSI Europe. In úøùú – the year Monsanto submitted the dossier for the re-approval of glyphosate – the ILSI group received a $ýøø,øøø (£ûüü,úûü) dona­ tion from Monsanto and a $ýúĀ,ýøø donation from the industry group Croplife International, which represents Monsanto, Dow, Syngenta, and others. The co-chair of the JMPR glyphosate sessions was Professor Angelo Moretto, a board member of the ILSI Health and Environmental Sciences Institute (HESI), and of its Riskúù steer­ ing group, which Boobis also co-chairs.

This failure of the German authority is partic­ ularly explosive because the hazard-based ap­ proach in the EU pesticide regulation forbids the authorization of an active substance as soon as there are positive cancer findings in at least two independent animal studies.

In addition, BfR repeatedly confused hazard with risk, apparently deliberately. Our pre­ sumption is that this was intended to divert attention from the hazard-based approach of EU law, which, in light of the positive cancer findings in mice and rats in the industry cancer studies, would require a ban for glyphosate.

Even the EPA’s forthcoming report on glypho­ sate – which was widely expected to give the chemical a clean bill of health – has become mired in controversy. According to court filings by people who believe that their cancer was caused by exposure to glyphosate herbicides, a former long-time EPA scientist, Marion Co­ pley, accused former top-ranking EPA official Jess Rowland of colluding with Monsanto to protect the company’s interests and deny that glyphosate was carcinogenic. Copley cited evi­ dence from animal studies and wrote to Row­ land: “It is essentially certain that glyphosate causes cancer.” Rowland left the EPA in úøùþ, shortly after the agency’s favourable report on glyphosate was leaked.

The whole of the evidence on glyphosate, taken together – animal studies, human epide­ miological evidence, and mechanistic evidence – provides ample confirmation of glyphosate’s carcinogenicity. Yet in a similar fashion to the Intertek papers, rather than evaluating the ev­ idence as a whole, BfR separated out the vari­ ous lines of evidence of glyphosate’s carcinoge­ nicity in order to deny them individually, and finally to discard the isolated evidence as a sin­ gle random result. It concluded that glyphosate does not warrant a carcinogenic classification.

In sum, attempts by agencies and individu­ als to defend glyphosate and its formulations against evidence that they cause cancer and damage DNA are scientifically unsound and un­ dermined by serious conflicts of interest.

In parallel with these scientific shortcomings, the regulatory and expert agencies’ reports on glyphosate are also compromised by conflicts of interest, as detailed in Chapter ý. For exam­ ple, the same people who were involved in the European evaluation of glyphosate in Germa­ ny in the ùāāøs are also involved in the current re-evaluation. Some have evaluated glyphosate for national agencies and then re-evaluated their own previous decisions at the EU and in­ ternational level, in different positions. This is a problem because if individuals are asked to as­ sess their own earlier assessment, they will not be inclined to admit any mistakes – particularly regarding a politically and economically sensi­ tive issue like the re-approval of glyphosate.

In the light of our findings, we recommend that the evaluations of glyphosate and its formula­ tions by individuals and institutions compromised by conflicts of interest are set aside. If these in­ stitutions and individuals wish to address their flawed evaluations, they must openly address the scientific points and evidence raised in this report. For the sake of transparency, they should use only studies available in the public domain. In the meantime, glyphosate-based formulations should be phased out as a precautionary mea­ sure. The continuation of the European authori­ zation of glyphosate would lead to an unaccept­ able risk of cancer, which would be avoided by correctly observing the laws and respecting scien­ tific integrity.

Some people who have evaluated glyphosate

Introduction 1

Chapter ù

Monsanto has a problem – and comes 2 up with a solution

Chapter ú

Bad science of industry-sponsored 9 papers defending glyphosate

Chapter û

Individual conflicts of interest 19 among defenders of glyphosate

Chapter ü

Bad science of the regulatory authorities 30

Chapter ý

Institutional conflicts of interest in 38 regulatory and expert bodies

Conclusion and recommendations 47

References 49

About the authors 66

Introduction

on the market. However, that market was threatened when in úøùý the World Health Organization’s cancer agency IARC, based on a comprehensive review of the peer-reviewed scientific literature, classified glyphosate as a probable human carcinogen.ā

Glyphosate-based herbicides are the most widely used herbicides in the world. The best known glyphosate product is Monsanto’s Roundup. The use of glyphosate-based herbi­ cides has massively expanded since the intro­ duction in the mid-ùāāøs of genetically modi­ fied (GM) glyphosate-tolerant crops,ù which are engineered to survive being sprayed with large amounts of the herbicide. Around Āý% of GM crops are glyphosate-tolerant.ú

Monsantoùø and various regulatory and expert bodiesùù,ùú,ùû denied or downplayed the link be­ tween glyphosate and cancer. This view has been reinforced by the publication of a series of industry-sponsored and -supported reviews in peer-reviewed scientific journals, which con­ cluded that glyphosate and its commercial for­ mulations do not cause cancer and other seri­ ous diseases.

However, glyphosate has many other uses. It is sprayed to “dry down” or desiccate many types of crops before harvest. It’s also used for weed control by farmers, home gardeners, and public authorities on roads, pavements, railway lines, parks, school grounds, and other public areas.

Nearly two years after IARC published its ver­ dict, the row rages on. Yet the question of whether glyphosate and its commercial herbi­ cide formulations cause cancer could affect the health and lives of millions of people.

So it’s perhaps no surprise that glyphosate turns up everywhere: in rain and air,û streams,ü and people’s bloodý and urine.þ

The public relies on the judgments of regula­ tory and expert bodies to protect them from the harmful effects of pesticides. They expect these bodies to act objectively in the public in­ terest and to base their opinions on the best science. So it is vital that these bodies strictly guard their independence from industry and carry out their assessments using the most rig­ orous analytical methods.

Its widespread use also explains why glypho­ sate is such a lucrative product for the agro­ chemical industry. The global glyphosate mar­ ket is expected to cross US$ ùø billion by úøúù.ÿ

The last patent on glyphosate expired in úøøø. The chemical is now manufactured by many companies, including Monsanto, and is includ­ ed in numerous herbicide brands throughout the globe.Ā

This report examines whether these bodies are truly independent and objective in their assessments of glyphosate, as well as looking at the quality of the scientific arguments they rely upon. The report analyzes conflicts of in­ terest of individuals and institutions that have defended the safety of the chemical and asks whether there is any connection between con­ flicts of interest and scientific practice.

Monsanto maintains its share of the global glyphosate market by packaging and selling its glyphosate-tolerant (Roundup Ready) GM seeds with its own brands of glyphosate herbi­ cides. It’s been estimated that in úøùý the com­ pany made nearly $ü.ÿþ billion in sales and $ù.ā billion in gross profits from herbicide products – and most of that was from Roundup. That represents a significant portion of the global glyphosate market.Ā

A future report in this series will examine the attacks on IARC, which reached a peak after the agency published its opinion on glyphosate. It will look at the criticisms leveled against IARC and scientists associated with it and examine the issue of conflicts of interest as it relates to individuals on both sides of the debate.

It is clear that there are huge financial inter­ ests in keeping glyphosate herbicide products

Chapter ù

included in the dossier submitted by industry to regulators.ú

Monsanto has a

This presented Monsanto with a problem. That’s because in recent years, a growing number of peer-reviewed studies in the published scientif­ ic literature have pointed to the harmful ef­ fects of glyphosate and its commercial formu­ lations.û If these studies were taken seriously by the European authorities, glyphosate might be banned.

problem – and comes up with a

solution

This was an especially likely outcome in the light of the fact that Europe’s pesticide regu­ lation (ùùøÿ/úøøā) has hazard-based cut-off criteria for carcinogenicity and genotoxicity (DNA-damaging effects, which can lead to can­ cer), among certain other serious toxic effects. This means that pesticide active ingredients that are classified under the European system as carcinogens in category ùA (known to have carcinogenic potential for humans, largely based on human evidenceü) or ùB (presumed to have carcinogenic potential for humans, large­ ly based on animal evidenceü) or as category ùA or ùB mutagens* are not allowed to be market­ ed.ú No negotiation is possible based on argu­ ments that the doses that people are exposed to are believed safe and that therefore the risk is acceptably low.

“Companies often contest scientific evidence of the hazards related to their products, with some even standing accused of deliberately manufacturing evidence to infuse scientific un­ certainty and delay restrictions. There are also serious claims of scientists being ‘bought’ to re­ state industry talking points.”

– UN Report of the Special Rapporteur on the right to food, ü January úøùÿù

In úøùú the European authorization for gly­ phosate, the active ingredient of the most widely used herbicides in the world, was due to expire. Monsanto and other companies that market glyphosate herbicides, united in a co­ alition called the Glyphosate Task Force (GTF), applied to the authorities for re-authorization of the chemical.

Monsanto and other glyphosate manufactur­ ing companies duly prepared their dossier of safety studies on glyphosate – including stud­ ies from the peer-reviewed scientific literature. They submitted it to the German authorities in May úøùú (see Renewal Assessment Report, p. û).ý For both the current re-evaluation of glyphosate and the initial approval in úøøú, Germany has been the “rapporteur” member state, responsible for overseeing the applica­ tion and liaising between industry and the EU authorities in the authorization process. The RAR contains BfR’s comments and conclusions on the GTF’s summaries of the results of the in­ dustry studies.

But something was getting in the way: science.

To understand why, we need to consider the way that pesticides have been approved in the past and how that has changed.

Historically, applications for pesticide approv­ als have been almost exclusively based on safe­ ty studies sponsored and provided by the pesti­ cide industry.

But in úøøā in Europe, this situation changed. The new pesticides regulation, ùùøÿ/úøøā, spec­ ified for the first time that in addition to the industry studies, studies from the “scientific peer-reviewed open literature” must also be

The RAR reveals that when it came to genotox­ icity, Monsanto was faced with a problem. The

RAR lists the findings of a number of peer-re­ viewed studies identified in industry’s litera­ ture search that look at the genotoxic effects of glyphosate and its commercial formulations. The majority of studies on both glyphosate and the formulations are positive – in other words, they found that glyphosate can damage DNA (see pages üøø–üøý).ý

By October úøùú Monsanto and other compa­ nies that wanted glyphosate to be re-approved had formed the Glyphosate Task Force, which is led by Monsanto.þ Monsanto also set up a website that makes reassuring claims about the safety of glyphosate.ÿ Among them are that glyphosate “is not carcinogenic and does not have mutagenic effects, i.e. it does not alter DNA”.Ā

Things did not look good for glyphosate. Monsanto and its allies were badly in need of a strategy to save the chemical and keep it on the market. If science was getting in the way of glyphosate’s re-approval, then perhaps anoth­ er kind of “science” was needed.

The IARC bombshell

In úøùý a bombshell hit Monsanto and its fel­ low agrochemical firms when the International

How the regulatory

by other scientists. If they are judged worthy of publication, they are openly published. This allows studies in the peer-reviewed literature to be freely discussed and replicated and their findings confirmed, refined, or refuted – a defin­ ing feature of science.

It is only fair that industry pays for the studies that are carried out to assess the safety of indus­ trial products, like pesticides. However, industry should pay the money into a fund admin­ istered by a public body, which would then commission inde­ pendent laboratories to carry out the tests. Industry must not directly sponsor or become the “owner” of a study.

system fails the public

Most members of the public believe that the regulatory system protects them against exposure to unsafe products. Specifically, many people as­ sume that regulators perform or commission independent tests on pesticides to ensure that they are safe. These peo­ ple are shocked to learn that in order to reach their evalu­ ation, regulators and agencies across the world read indus­ try-commissioned toxicology studies – studies that are clas­ sified as commercial secrets and are generally unpub­ lished, meaning that indepen­ dent scientists cannot assess the data, their interpretation, and the conclusions drawn from them.

Does it matter that safety research is sponsored by in­ dustry? The evidence shows that it does. Reviews of the scientific literature on the safety, toxicity, or efficacy of various products show that industry-linked studies are far more likely than studies by scientists working inde­ pendently of the industry to find the product under exam­ ination to be safe and effica­ cious. That applies to a wide range of risky and controver­ sial products – from tobaccoā, 10 to pharmaceutical drugs,11,12 mobile phones,13 cognitive or cardiovascular function, hor­ mone levels, symptoms, and subjective well-being and genetically modified (GM) foods14 and crops.15 There is no reason to believe that pes­ ticides are an exception to this rule.

The úøøā EU pesticides reg­ ulation required industry for the first time to include academic studies from the peer-reviewed literature in the dossiers it submits to reg­ ulators.2 This move attempted to open up the regulatory sys­ tem to the published discover­ ies of scientists working out­ side the industry.

But as this report shows, industry is fighting back by sponsoring reviews in peer-re­ viewed journals with conclu­ sions that are favourable to its products. It is assisted by reg­ ulatory authorities’ reluctance to give much weight to the findings of academic scientists and by their preference for in­ dustry studies.16

This runs counter to the prin­ ciple of science, which has always progressed through open publication in the peer-reviewed literature. The idea of peer-reviewed pub­ lication is that prior to pub­ lication, studies are checked for quality (“peer-reviewed”)

Industry-sponsored reviews reassure on glypho­

Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), an arm of the World Health Organization, classified glyphosate as a probable human carcinogen. The agency based its verdict on “sufficient” ev­ idence of carcinogenicity in animals and “lim­ ited” evidence in humans. It added that there was “strong” evidence that glyphosate is geno­ toxic (damages DNA).ùÿ Genotoxicity is one of the mechanisms through which a chemical can cause cancer.

sate safety

Monsanto and other companies financed a se­ ries of peer-reviewed scientific reviews, all of­ fering reassuring conclusions about the safety of glyphosate herbicides. Some key reviews are introduced below and a selection is analyzed for scientific quality in Chapter ú. The conflicts of interest of some of the authors are detailed in Chapter û.

IARC has a policy of only considering studies that are publicly available,ùĀ unlike pesticide regulators, who consider mainly industry stud­ ies that are commercial secrets and mostly un­ published.ùā

It is significant that industry fought back against the studies finding harm from glypho­ sate and its formulations with “reviews”, not with primary research. That means that Mon­ santo paid scientists to evaluate the scientific quality of primary research studies. They effec­ tively tell us what is sound science and what is junk science.

IARC is internationally respected for its ex­ pertise and independence. Its carcinogenicity classifications are utilized by government agen­ cies worldwide. Clearly, in order to avert bans and restrictions on the herbicide, the industry would have to fight back hard.

History of Monsanto-

The first counterblow came in the media. Hugh Grant, Monsanto’s chairman and CEO, dismissed the IARC report as “junk science” that was creating “confusion for consumers”.úø Robb Fraley, Monsanto’s chief technology of­ ficer, said, “We are outraged with this assess­ ment. This conclusion is inconsistent with the decades of ongoing comprehensive safety re­ views by the leading regulatory authorities around the world that have concluded that all labeled uses of glyphosate are safe for human health. This result was reached by selective ‘cherry picking’ of data and is a clear example of agenda-driven bias.”21

supported reviews

For at least two decades, Monsanto has fi­ nanced or otherwise supported the publication of peer-reviewed reviews with conclusions em­ phasizing the safety of glyphosate and glypho­ sate-based herbicides.

For example, in úøøø the former Monsan­ to consultant Gary Murray Williams23 and col­ leagues published a Monsanto-supported re­ view in the industry-linked journal* Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology that concluded that glyphosate is non-carcinogenic and that “under present and expected conditions of use, Roundup herbicide does not pose a health risk to humans.”24

In reality, however, this claimed decades-long regulatory consensus is false. What Monsan­ to omits is that in ùāĀý, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) classified glyphosate as a possible human carcinogen, based on ex­ periments showing kidney tumours in glypho­ sate-treated mice. Input from Monsanto led to a dubious reinterpretation of these studies by the EPA and the reclassification of glyphosate as non-carcinogenic in ùāāù.22

Another example was a úøùú review sponsored by Monsantoúý that appeared to try to counter a growing body of evidence from animal and hu­ man studies linking glyphosate and its formula­ tions to adverse reproductive outcomes.úþ,úÿ,úĀ,úā This review of developmental and reproductive outcomes in humans and animals after gly­ phosate exposure concluded, “The available

literature shows no solid evidence linking gly­ phosate exposure to adverse developmental or reproductive effects at environmentally realis­ tic exposure concentrations.”úý

Thanks to recently released documents,ûù we now know in detail how Monsanto developed a strategic plan for placing industry’s opinion, in the form of the Kier and Kirkland review, in the “independent scientific literature”.

Below are listed some of the key reviews that Monsanto and other pesticide companies have sponsored and supported that promote the notion of the safety of glyphosate and its formulations.

In úøùú, Roger McClellen, editor of the journal Critical Reviews in Toxicology, was approached by Larry Kier, clearly to pave the way for pub­ lishing the review. Thought was given to how to create “credibility”, in the light of contra­ dictions between industry’s confidential study reports “weighing in on negative genotox re­ sults vs. the publication record weighing in on positive genotox results”.ûù See the excerpt be­ low from email dated ù8 July úøùú, from David Saltmiras of Monsanto, on p. ù8ý of the pdf of released documents: ù)

Key review 1:

Kier and Kirkland (2013)30

As the IARC reportùÿ and even BfR’s Renewal Assessment Report on glyphosate found, there are a large number of studies in the peer-re­ viewed scientific literature that indicate that glyphosate and its formulations are genotoxicý and thus could be mutagenic. According to the EU pesticides regulation, active substances that are mutagenic in mammals must be banned.ú Moreover, genotoxicity in general serves as mechanistic evidence for carcinogenic effects.

This paper was submitted on ù9 December úøùú and published on ùú March úøùû, and it had its price. By adding David Kirkland to the manuscript, the estimated cost jumped from US$9,øøø to roughly US$ûø,øøø, although Kirkland indicated that “his efforts will be less than ùø days”ûù (p. ù9ù of the pdf), with a daily honorarium of approximately US$ú,úøø (ù,üøø British pounds). Monsanto termed this “a fair investment” (p. ù8û of the pdf).ûù We call it “buying science”. ú)

Kier and Kirkland’s review (úøùû)ûø addressed the question of glyphosate’s genotoxicity and concluded that glyphosate and glypho­ sate-based herbicides do not present “signifi­ cant genotoxic risk” in normal exposures. The review was funded by the Monsanto-led Gly­ phosate Task Force.ûø Larry Kier is a former Monsanto employee and David Kirkland is a former consultant to Monsanto.23

The reason that Monsanto spent all this money was that the original version (written by Larry Kier alone) “stretched the limits of credibility”

ù)

ú)

û)

and “this became a very difficult story to tell given all the complicated ‘noise’ out there”ûù (p. ù8û of the pdf). û)

cations to the IARC monograph (see below) and yet did not contact the nominal authors of these papers. It is, of course, possible that the contact between Monsanto and the nominal authors was indirect, but nonetheless it would have been ultimately controlled by Monsanto. 5)

On ù9 February úøùý, in a similar move, Mon­ santo strategically planned to counter the re­ sults of the IARC meeting. For that, they were willing to pay US$úýø,øøø or more, “depend­ ing on what comes out of the IARC meeting”ûù (p. úøû of the pdf). The results were the “In­ tertek papers” of úøùþ (see “Key reviews û–7: The Intertek papers (úøùþ)”, below). Monsanto was just not sure in which science disciplines the money should be invested. To keep the cost down, Monsanto considered ghost-writ­ ing papers so that the “expert” nominal au­ thors “would just edit & sign their names so to speak”. Monsanto’s remark, “Recall that is how we handled Williams Kroes & Munro, úøøø”ûù (a much cited review), indicated that this had worked before (see p. úøü of the pdf). ü)

5)

4)

This strategy appears to be in stark contrast with the claim that the nominal authors of the Intertek papers “were not directly contacted by the Monsanto Company” (Williams and col­ leagues, úøùþûú). It is hard to believe that Mon­ santo was strategically planning counter-publi­

In the light of this strategy, another statement by Williams and colleagues also appears diffi­ cult to believe: “Neither any Monsanto com­ pany employees nor any attorneys reviewed any of the expert panel’s manuscripts prior to submission to the journal.”ûú Alternatively, the

statement may be technically true, but it does not rule out the possibility that Monsanto em­ ployees actually wrote the manuscripts or parts of them. If that were the case, there would have been no need for them to “review” their own work.

The timing of this review is worth noting. It was published online on úþ February úøùý.û6 This was three weeks before the initial publication in The Lancet of IARC’s classification of glypho­ sate as a probable carcinogen.û7 It was also in time to influence the final draft of the Renew­ al Assessment Report,ý which was submitted by the BfR via BVL to EFSA on ûù March úøùý. Greim and colleagues may have been aware of that date, since in their review they cite the previous draft of the Renewal Assessment Re­ port (dated úā January úøùý). That draft was not publicly available, so it appears that Greim and colleagues were given privileged access. Also, Greim and colleagues’ review is cited in BfR’s Renewal Assessment Report (version of ûù March úøùý, p. āüÿ).

It seems that these investments in Monsantoand Glyphosate Task Force-sponsored “inde­ pendent” publications have paid off well. BfR’s Renewal Assessment Report refers to Kier and Kirkland’s paper of úøùû to emphasize “the overwhelming preponderance of negative re­ sults in well-conducted bacterial reversion and in vivo mammalian micronucleus and chromo­ somal aberration assays”, which indicate “that glyphosate and typical GBFs [glyphosate-based formulations] are not genotoxic”.ûû, ý More­ over, the more recent evaluation by the US EPA made major reference to Kier and Kirkland and followed their conclusions.ûü

Key reviews 3–7:

The Intertek papers (2016)

The “Intertek papers” also made it into the evaluation conducted by the Federal Insecti­ cide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act Scientific Advisory Panel (FIFRA SAP) of the US EPA’s re­ port on glyphosate. The panel recommended that “several relevant papers” which “have been published… should be reviewed…. These manuscripts include reviews by Acquavella et al., úøùþ, Williams et al., úøùþ, and several others that will be readily identified by US EPA when it updates its literature search.”ûý

A major aspect of Monsanto’s strategy against the IARC verdict was to sponsor a series of five scientific reviews,38, 39, 32, 40, 41 which were all pub­ lished in late úøùþ in the same peer-reviewed journal. As stated in the declarations of interest in each paper, all were funded by Monsanto via Intertek. The lead review carries the following statement: “This article is part of a supplement, sponsored and supported by Intertek Scientif­ ic & Regulatory Consultancy. Funding for the sponsorship of this supplement was provided to Intertek by the Monsanto Company, which is a primary producer of glyphosate and products containing this active ingredient.”û2

Key review 2:

Greim and colleagues (2015)36

For the purposes of this report we call these reviews the Intertek papers.

This review, an evaluation of the carcinogen­ ic potential of glyphosate, was published in úøùý and was co-authored by (among others) Helmut Greim, MD, Professor Emeritus, Toxi­ cology and Environmental Hygiene, Technical University Munich, and a former consultant to Monsanto.úû A co-author was David Saltmiras, a Monsanto employee. Greim was paid by Mon­ santo for providing his expertise. The review concluded that “glyphosate does not present concern with respect to carcinogenic potential in humans”.û6

All of these reviews defended the safety of glyphosate with regard to key health effects. Their specific aim was to counter IARC’s evalua­ tion of glyphosate as a probable human carcin­ ogen and as genotoxic (damaging to DNA), as the articles themselves explicitly state. In addi­ tion, an accompanying commentary by the ed­ itor of the journal stated that the Intertek pa­ pers were intended to counter IARC’s verdict.42

Conclusion

In úøøā a new regulation was passed in Eu­ rope that required industry to include studies from the peer-reviewed scientific literature in the dossiers submitted in support of pesticide approvals.

Taken together with studies from industry, many of these studies link glyphosate and its commercial formulations with harmful effects, including carcinogenicity and genotoxicity. As pesticide active ingredients with carcinogenic potential are not allowed to be marketed in Eu­ rope, a proper evaluation of the science would necessarily lead to glyphosate being banned.

The onslaught of scientific articles showing problems with glyphosate reached a peak in úøùý with the publication of a report by IARC, the World Health Organization’s cancer agen­ cy, classifying glyphosate as a probable carcin­ ogen and pointing to evidence that it is geno­ toxic.

For the past two decades, Monsanto and other companies have countered such developments by financing and supporting the publication of scientific reviews in peer-reviewed journals. These reviews reach reassuring conclusions about the safety of glyphosate and its commer­ cial formulations.

In Chapter ú we analyze the scientific quality of some of these publications. In Chapter û we detail the conflicts of interest of the authors – including links to Monsanto and other agro­ chemical firms; the industry-funded Interna­ tional Life Sciences Institute (ILSI); and testing and consultancy firms that serve industry.

Chapter ú

concern with respect to carcinogenic potential in humans”.ù

Bad science of in­ dustry-sponsored papers defending

Greim and colleagues presented incidence ta­ bles of several types of tumour. However, these were irrelevant for the assessment because they were clearly not related to treatment with glyphosate. This can be seen from the pattern of the tumour incidences – there is no increase as compared to the control groups, no signifi­ cance in the increases, and/or no dose-depen­ dence. They comprised lung adenomas, lung adenocarcinomas, broncho-alveolar adenomas, broncho-alveolar carcinomas, and pituitary ad­ enomas in mice.ù

glyphosate

In Chapter ù we saw how, in response to a growing number of peer-reviewed scientific studies finding serious health risks from gly­ phosate and its commercial formulations, Mon­ santo and other companies and industry-linked bodies commissioned or otherwise supported the publication of counter-reviews that de­ fended the safety of the chemical.*

It would be fully appropriate to include these tumours in the tables if it were done to provide the complete picture. But Greim and colleagues did something very different. They listed these irrelevant tumours – yet failed to mention those tumours that were significantly increased in incidence in glyphosate-treated animals (as revealed by BfR’s Addendum to the Renewal Assessment Reportú).

Many of the authors of these reviews had con­ flicts of interest with industry or industry-linked bodies. These are analyzed in detail in Chapter û.

To sceptical members of the public and scien­ tific community, this may at the very least ap­ pear to be misleading and at worst may appear to be fraud. For example, this applies to the fol­ lowing studies:

However, some might argue that such con­ flicts of interest do not matter as long as the scientific quality of the reviews is sound. With that in mind, we offer the following analysis of several of the Monsanto-sponsored Intertek papers, along with some additional reviews sponsored by glyphosate manufacturers that also defend glyphosate-based herbicides.

• Mouse study of ùāāû (sponsor: Chemino­ va). Greim and colleagues did not mention the statistically significant increase in hae­ mangiosarcomas (blood vessel cancers) in glyphosate-treated animals.

Bad scientific practice no. 1:

• Mouse study of ùāāÿ (Arysta Life Science). Greim and colleagues did not mention the statistically significant increase in haeman­ giosarcomas and kidney tumours in gly­ phosate-treated animals.

Flood the reader with irrelevant data, but omit the

important data

Greim and colleagues (2015)1

• Mouse study of úøøù (Feinchemie Schweb­ da). Greim and colleagues did not men­ tion the statistically significant increase in kidney tumours in glyphosate-treated an­ imals.

This evaluation of the carcinogenic potential of glyphosate by Greim and colleagues (úøùý), which had Monsanto employee David Saltmiras among the authors and which was supported by Monsanto and the Glyphosate Task Force, concluded that “glyphosate does not present

• Mouse study of úøøā (Nufarm). Greim and colleagues presented the data on malig­

nant lymphoma in males but did not men­ tion that these date indicate a highly sig­ nificant (p=ø.øøûÿ) and dose-dependent increase in malignant lymphoma. Instead, they claimed that there were “no treat­ ment-related effects”.

As proof of this claim, they offer “the paper of Greim et al (úøùý),ù who evaluated ùü carcino­ genicity studies, nine chronic/carcinogenicity studies in the rat, including one peer-reviewed published study, and five carcinogenicity stud­ ies with glyphosate in mice.” In contrast, Wil­ liams and colleagues point out, “The IARC Monograph reviewed only six rat and two mouse studies.”

Similarly the pancreatic tumours in male rats in the ùāĀù study by Monsanto were not listed by Greim and colleagues, although they were significantly increased in glyphosate-treated animals, while data for pituitary tumours were presented in detail, even though they are not relevant because no statistically significant in­ crease was identified. Likewise the significantly increased incidence in liver cell tumours in the ùāāø rat study by Monsanto was not mentioned by Greim and colleagues.

The latter statement is true, but ignores IARC’s policy as stated in the Preamble attached to each of its Monographs: “With regard to ep­ idemiological studies, cancer bioassays, and mechanistic and other relevant data, only re­ ports that have been published or accepted in the openly available scientific literature are re­ viewed. … Data from government agency re­ ports that are publicly available are also con­ sidered.”ý

It is worth noting that Greim and colleagues had access to BfR’s internal documents, as they referred to an interim version of several vol­ umes of the Draft Renewal Assessment Report (the úā January úøùý revision),ù which the pub­ lic never had access to. The question arises as to why BfR apparently gave Greim and colleagues (including Monsanto’s Saltmiras) privileged ac­ cess to non-public regulatory documents. This might be justified with a claim that chemical producers should receive an advance copy, but it seems to us that on principle, industry should not have access to draft regulatory documents.

Industry generally refuses to make its study reports publicly available. So it is ironic that in­ dustry’s paid authors criticize IARC for not in­ cluding these unpublished studies.

“

Industry generally refuses to make its study reports publicly available. So it is ironic that industry’s paid authors criticize

IARC for not including these unpublished

studies.”

Bad scientific practice no. 2:

Williams and colleagues argued that the data from these studies would in fact have been available to IARC because they were “detailed in a supplement to the Greim et al (úøùý) pa­ per”.û What they omitted to mention is that IARC did evaluate this publication, but decid­ ed not to include it. The sound scientific reason for non-inclusion is described in IARC’s report: “because the information provided in the re­ view article and its supplement was insufficient (e.g. information lacking on statistical meth­ ods, choice of doses, body weight gain, survival data, details on histopathological examination and/or stability of dosed feed mixture).”þ

Take facts out of context to dismiss inconvenient evidence

Williams and colleagues (2016)3

(Intertek paper)

After introducing a reasonable concept for scientific reviews (“In any review, if any studies are to be ignored, the reasons for this should be provided”), the former Monsanto consul­ tantü Gary Murray Williams and colleagues expressed their “opinion that the IARC evalu­ ation showed selectivity in the choice of data reviewed, with some omissions for which rea­ sons were not clearly presented”.û

In other words, relevant information was held back by industry.

Bad scientific practice no. 3: Industry-friendly experts re­ evaluate data until it no lon­ ger threatens the approval of

Kuschner re-evaluated the original ḱidney sections from Monsanto’s mouse study and claimed to have found a new renal tumour in a control mouse, no. ùøúĀ.ā,ùù

This was an important tumour for Monsanto. If its existence were confirmed, an age-adjust­ ed statistical analysis would demonstrate no tumour-causing effect of glyphosate using the controls within the experiment.ùú Thus glypho­ sate would have been exonerated from suspi­ cion of being a carcinogen.

a pesticide

Williams and colleagues (2016)3

(Intertek paper)

In March ùāĀý the US Environmental Protec­ tion Agency (EPA) classified glyphosate as a group C carcinogenÿ (“possible human carcin­ ogen”Ā).

But initially, Kuschner seemed to be the only one who could see the alleged new tumour in the control mouse. The EPA pathologist Louis Kasza stated that the alleged tumour “does not represent a pathophysiologically significant change”.ā, ùû

Williams and colleagues address this episode in their paper, referring to “the renal neo­ plasms [kidney tumours] that occurred in the first two-year, oral chronic toxicity, and carcino­ genicity study in CD-ù mice (Monsanto ùāĀû).û Glyphosate had caused renal (kidney) tubule adenomas, a rare kind of tumour, in a dose-de­ pendent manner. There were ø, ø, ù, and û inci­ dences of this tumour in the control, low-dose, mid-dose, and high-dose groups respectively.ā

To be on the safe side, the EPA arranged for additional kidney sections to be cut from the male mice in all groups of the feeding study. The new sections were then examined on slides under the microscope by “a number of pathol­ ogists”, including Kasza. The pathologists con­ firmed the presence of all the tumours report­ ed in the original study. But not one of them could find Kuschner’s claimed extra control mouse tumour.ùû, ā

The crucial story that follows is omitted by Williams and colleagues in their paper, thus giving a misleading impression that the car­ cinogenicity concerns were laid to rest on a sci­ entific basis.

Therefore Kuschner’s claimed tumour could not be recognized as such in the original slide or in any of the new sections cut by the US EPA scientists.

In the second half of ùāĀý the US EPA classi­ fication of glyphosate as a possible carcinogen came under pressure after the original tumours were (as reported by Williams and colleagues) “re-evaluated by a pathology working group (PWG)… and peer review experts including Dr Marvin Kuschner M.D., Dean, School of Med­ icine, State University of New York at Stony Brook”.û

Reporting to Monsanto: the Pathology Work­ ing Group

In parallel, Monsanto commissioned a group of four consultants to review Kuschner’s al­ leged tumour finding and evaluate the signifi­ cance of the kidney tumours. The re-evaluation took place in the summer or autumn of ùāĀý.

According to his biographical entry in Pra­ book, from ùāÿā Kuschner was also a member of Monsanto’s Biohazards Commissionùø (see Chapter û). Williams and colleagues do not in­ clude any information on Kuschner’s interests.

In their report to Monsanto, these consul­ tants, together with the five pathologists that formed the pathology working group (PWG), contradicted the US EPA pathologists. They stated that they were able to confirm Kus­ chner’s tumour finding in the original slide of control mouse no. ùøúĀ. They also claimed that they were convinced that the tumours in three high-dose males were not related to glypho­ sate treatment, but due to chance.ùù

It is unclear who convened and instructed the PWG.

Bad scientific practice no. 4:

In February ùāĀþ a Federal Insecticide, Fungi­ cide, and Rodenticide Act Scientific Advisory Panel (FIFRA-SAP) recommended to the US EPA that it accept the control tumour because “the vast majority of the pathologists… agreed that the lesion represented a renal adenoma”.ùú

Make false statements and

hope that neither the re‑ viewer of the manuscript nor

the majority of readers pays

The FIFRA-SAP also noted: “In addition, the statistical analysis shall be age-adjusted; when this is done, no oncogenic [carcinogenic] effect of glyphosate is demonstrated using concur­ rent controls.”ùú

attention to detail

Williams and colleagues (2016)3

(Intertek paper)

The FIFRA-SAP recommended that the EPA re-classify glyphosate as Category D (not clas­ sified regarding carcinogenicity) and order further studies in rats or mice “to clarify unre­ solved questions”.ùú

According to Williams and colleagues, four other chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity mouse studies with glyphosate did not pro­ duce kidney neoplasms. They refer to the stud­ ies sponsored by Cheminova ùāāûa; Arysta Life Sciences ùāāÿ; Feinchemie Schwebda úøøù; and Nufarm úøøā.û

In September ùāĀĀ the EPA followed the re‑ commendation of the FIFRA-SAP and classified glyphosate as Category D.ùü In October ùāāù the EPA classified glyphosate in Category E• (evidence of non-carcinogenicity).ùý •

But this is incorrect. As can be seen from Ta­ ble ù, with data derived from the CLH Report,ùþ two of the four studies mentioned by Williams and colleagues revealed kidney neoplasms in the high and/or mid-dose. The increases were even statistically significant when using the Co­ chran-Armitage Trend Test, which is explicitly recommended for the assessment of tumour incidences by OECD Guidance ùùþ.ùÿ

While Williams and colleagues used the sup­ posed lack of significance of the renal tumours in the Monsanto ùāĀû study, they remained si­ lent about the study’s troubled history and the conflicts of interest involved in its re-evalua­ tion.û

Table ù: Significant increases in kidney neoplasms and p-value based on Cochran-Armitage Trend Test. Data from draft CLH-Reportùþ

Study owner/year Control Low-Dose Mid-Dose High-Dose p-value

Monsanto ùāĀû (ù)* ø ù** û*** ø.øûûā ø.øûÿø#

Arysta Life Science ùāāÿ ø ø ø ú ø.øøÿĀ

Feinchemie Schwebda úøøù ø ø ù ú ø.øûāø

* an adenoma was identified by Marvin Kuschner (“peer review expert”3) when re-examining the slides of the control group, while subsequent additional kidney sections from this mouse study prepared at the request of the EPA did not reveal “additional tumors, but confirmed the presence of the tumors identified in the original study report”.13

** carcinoma

*** ù adenoma, ú carcinomas

Bad scientific practice no. 5:

The claim by Williams and colleagues that “In an ùĀ-month diet study in CD-ù mice, his­ topathological evaluations of groups dosed up to üúøø mg/kg/d of GLY [glyphosate] (HD [high dose]), did not show any evidence of renal [kid­ ney] neoplasms in male or female mice (Arysta Life Sciences ùāāÿ)”û is a repetition of the false statement cited above. Likewise, with regard to the study of Feinchemie Schwebda (úøøù), it is incorrect to state that “GLY produced no statis­ tically significant neoplastic lesions”,û because the incidence was dose-dependent and statisti­ cally significant (see Table ù above).

Favour publications that fit the pre-ordained conclusion,

even if they are weak, and dismiss publications that do

not fit, even if they are of

high quality

Acquavella and colleagues (2016)18

(Intertek paper)

Thus the conclusions about kidney tumours in glyphosate-treated mice drawn by Williams and colleaguesû are invalid, as they are based on false statements and distorted facts.

The above approach was the principal method used by Acquavella and colleagues to reach the conclusion that “only one study in the glypho­ sate literature… deserves the highest weight in our assessment”. In contrast, they stated, “The other studies have so many validity con­ cerns that they cannot be interpreted at face value.”ùĀ

The misleading statements by Williams and colleagues are not restricted to renal tumours. Regarding the studies on haemangiosarcoma (blood vessel cancer), they state: “There were no statistically significant increases in the incidence of any tumors when compared with the control groups and no dose response was evident.”û

This “weight of evidence evaluation” was the basis for the authors’ conclusion that “the ap­ plication of commonly applied causal criteria do not indicate a relationship with glyphosate exposure and NHL [non-Hodgkin lymphoma, a type of cancer]”. They added, “Our conclusion for NHL differs from that of the IARC workgroup seemingly because we considered the null [no effect of glyphosate herbicides] NHL findings from the AHS [Agricultural Health Study] to be more convincing than the case control studies, in aggregate, with their major limitations.”ùĀ

However, the Addendum to the Renewal As­ sessment Report (RAR), prepared by the Ger­ man Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR) and published in November úøùý, would have been available for the authors. As can be seen in this Addendum,ú two out of five mouse stud­ ies showed a statistically significant increase in the incidence of haemangiosarcoma in male CD-ù mice when using the Cochran-Armitage Trend Test.

The AHS is a cohort study, where the partic­ ipants are selected and then followed over many years to see whether tumours develop or not. Case control studies select tumour patients and analyze, on the basis of interviews and questionnaires, past exposure to the chemical in question.

However, the AHS (published as DeRoos and colleagues, úøøýùā) suffers from crucial limita­ tions, which Acquavella and colleagues even admit to. These were the “relatively short dura­ tion of followup for AHS cohort members, the relatively small number of NHL cases, and the likelihood of some degree of exposure misclas­ sification in the various analyses.”ùĀ

Crucially, however, they forgot to acknowl­

edge that the first of these factors essentially makes the study invalid. As the epidemiologist Dr Peter Infante explained,úø the median fol­ lowup time of þ.ÿ years “is unlikely to be long enough to account for cancer latency”.úù In ad­ dition, the time of initial exposure was not re­ ported in DeRoos and colleagues’ úøøý study,ùā making an estimate of the latency period (time since first exposure to glyphosate) impossible. Further, Infante pointed out that the control group itself had an elevated risk for NHL, thus underestimating the risk of NHL for glypho­ sate-exposed people.úø

meta-analysis dismissed these results on the grounds that the data did not establish a “caus­ al relationship” between glyphosate and NHL.úý

Finally, it seems obvious that a “weight of ev­ idence evaluation” should pay attention to the results of controlled animal studies. Howev­ er, Acquavella and colleagues simply forgot to take into consideration existing evidence from animal studies when evaluating the results from epidemiology. More precisely, they omit­ ted three mouse studies finding significantly increased incidence of malignant lymphoma in glyphosate-treated animals.úþ, úÿ But Acquavel­ la and colleagues were not the only ones who excluded malignant lymphoma from consider­ ation altogether, as can be seen in the following section.

On the other hand, Acquavella and colleagues make a blanket dismissal of all case control studies,ùĀ largely based on limitations that ap­ ply to case control studies in general, although three of them were ranked high (Eriksson and colleagues, úøøĀúú) or medium (McDuffie and colleagues, úøøù;úû DeRoos and colleagues, úøøûúü) quality by the US EPA. These three stud­ ies showed a significantly higher NHL risk for glyphosate exposure. For two of them (Eriksson and colleagues, úøøĀ; McDuffie and colleagues, úøøù), an exposure-response relationship was demonstrated. In addition, the study by Eriks­ son and colleagues (úøøĀ)úú was able to evalu­ ate latency – which the AHS study was unable to do – and an increase in risk related to the latency period was found.

Bad scientific practice no. 6:

Claim to have considered everything, but keep quiet

about inconvenient facts

Williams and colleagues (2016)3, 28 (two reviews, both Intertek papers, by these authors

are considered here)

Williams and colleagues stated that they “evaluated all available scientific data includ­ ing the results of a number of unpublished re­ ports, some of which have been submitted to and reviewed by regulatory authorities”.úĀ Thus they claim to have performed a more thorough review than the IARC.

Even a recent Monsanto-funded meta-analy­ sis admitted that there were positive associa­ tions between Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL) and glyphosate in the five of the six studies analyzed, resulting in a statistically significant overall association between glyphosate and NHL and an even stronger association between glyphosate and the B-cell subtype of NHL.úý

However, they neglected the observation of increased malignant lymphoma in glypho­ sate-treated male mice – despite their high relevance, given the fact that increased lym­ phoma (non-Hodgkin lymphoma) in glypho­ sate users have been reported in each of the case-control studies carried out (Eriksson and colleagues, úøøĀúú; McDuffie and colleagues, úøøùúû; and DeRoos and colleagues, úøøûúü). Although this tumour type was not evaluated by IARC because the agency had no access to the original data of these industry studies, it is reasonable to assume that in contrast, Williams and colleagues,û, úĀ sponsored by Monsanto, did have full access to the data.

These results clearly support IARC’s assessment of “limited” (but existing) evidence “in humans for the carcinogenicity of glyphosate”.þ “Lim­ ited” evidence, in IARC’s classification system, is only one class below “sufficient” evidence. It means that “A positive association has been observed between exposure to the agent and cancer for which a causal interpretation is con­ sidered by the Working Group to be credible, but chance, bias or confounding could not be ruled out with reasonable confidence.”ý

But the authors of the Monsanto-funded

In case they did not, the data would have been available from the RARúþ and its Adden­ dum.ú In contrast, IARC’s report was published more than three months before the RAR and its Addendum became publicly available in mid-November úøùý. So IARC did not have the opportunity to evaluate the data of these in­ dustry studies in their final form.

sate-based formulation.ûù Because these gly­ phosate-exposed rats consumed less food than the control animals, Williams and colleagues questioned the validity of this observation by citing literature that “showed that dietary re­ striction may affect lipid peroxidation and glu­ tathione peroxidase activity levels”, concluding that “therefore, it is not known whether the effects observed resulted from [the glyphosate formulation] treatment or reduced food and water intake”.ûø

Failing to mention malignant lymphoma is a crucial omission on the part of Williams and colleagues, because this cancer type was seen in all five mouse carcinogenicity studies, three of which showed significant increases. Of the oth­ er two studies, one was of limited quality and the other was invalid with regard to malignant lymphoma.ú, ùþ These studies comprise the most convincing evidence for the carcinogenicity of glyphosate in experimental animals.úā There­ fore it is illegitimate for William and colleagues to draw the conclusion “that glyphosate is not a carcinogen in laboratory animals”.

While it is correct that the cited papers (e.g. Kim and colleagues, ùāāþûú; Rao and colleagues, ùāāøûû) report the effects of food restriction on lipid peroxidation, Williams and colleaguesûø forgot to mention that the effect of food re­ striction shown these and other (Xia and col­ leagues, ùāāýûü) studies was a decrease in lipid peroxidation.

In other words, a comparison with a pair-fed control group (mimicking the reduced food consumption of glyphosate-treated dams) would probably have shown an even more pro­ nounced increase in lipid peroxidation caused by the glyphosate-based formulation.

Thus while Williams and colleagues accused IARC of “selectivity in the choice of data re­ viewed”,û it was they themselves who were guilty of this practice.

Bad scientific practice no. 7:

Bad scientific practice no. 8: Dismiss evidence by compar­

Make your argument looking scientific by referenc­

ing apples with oranges

ing the peer-reviewed liter­ ature, but turn the evidence

Williams and colleagues (2016)3

(Intertek paper)

upside-down

Table ù collates tumour incidences in eight rat studies,û suggesting a comprehensive review. Referring to this data collation, the authors concluded, ”The incidence of tumors shows no clear or consistent pattern, either across dose or individual study. Such a distribution of find­ ings strongly indicates that these incidences represent spontaneous variations.”

Williams and colleagues (2012)30

In this Monsanto-sponsored paper, Williams and colleagues (úøùú) performed a “critical analysis” of the developmental and reproduc­ tive outcomes in humans and animals after gly­ phosate exposure.ûø

This data collation ignores the fact that rats of considerable genetic difference were used in the different studies. The different types of rat commonly used in laboratory toxicology stud­ ies (for example, Sprague-Dawley and Wistar), differ genetically from one another, and it is well known that they can react differently to a

One of the papers they criticized is that of Beuret and colleagues (úøøü), who observed an increase in lipid peroxidation (oxidative degradation of lipids, a process that leads to cell damage) in the liver of pregnant rats and of their fetuses after exposure to a glypho­

particular test substance.ûý Making direct quan­ titative comparisons (e.g. of tumour incidences) between these different strains of rats is like comparing the training results of carthorses and racehorses and concluding that the train­ ing method is inconsistent.

They also incorrectly equate data on different sub-strains of the same type of rat (e.g. Wistar) but bred at different laboratories – the labo­ ratory is identified in the prefix to the name “Wistar”. For example, they equate data from Alpk:APfSD Wistar rats with data from Han Crl:­ WI Wistar rats.

There are also differences in response be­ tween sub-strains of the same “super-strain” of rat (e.g. Sprague-Dawley or Wistar) bred at different laboratories.ûý

Williams and colleagues have introduced so much “data noise” into their dataset by in­ cluding results from experiments on different strains and sub-strains of rat that it is almost guaranteed that no effect will be seen from the glyphosate treatment and the tumour in­ cidences will be put down to chance (“sponta­ neous variations”).

Collating data from a variety of experiments performed on rats of different genetic makeup widens the range of variability of tumour inci­ dence. Thus it increases the “data noise” in the dataset, masking the effect of the glyphosate treatment.

Bad scientific practice no. 9: Avoid a true scientific debate

Therefore it is good scientific practice to be very restrictive when it comes to making direct comparisons between different experiments and to confine the dataset to results from the same strain of rat and from the same labora­ tory. Essentially the rules laid out by the Orga­ nization for Economic Cooperation and Devel­ opment (OECD)ùÿ and the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA)ûþ for the use of historical control data – data from control animals from differ­ ent experiments potentially conducted under varying conditions – should be applied also for such comparisons as those that Williams and colleagues are attempting to make.

by failing to address the

evidence

Brusick and colleagues (2016)37

(Intertek paper)

Oxidative stress was one of the two modes of action through which the IARC considered that glyphosate might cause cancer – the oth­ er was genotoxicity. While oxidative stress is known to have genotoxic potential by itself, it is also involved in intracellular and molecular processes that are potentially carcinogenic but non-genotoxic (Klaunig and colleagues, úøùø;ûĀ Kakehashi and colleagues, úøùûûā).

These rules were heavily violated by Williams and colleagues in the comparisons made in Ta­ ble ù of their review. Thus the highly variable tumour incidences as presented in this table is not proof that the effect of glyphosate is incon­ sistent, but is simply proof of the genetic vari­ ability of the animals used. Therefore it does not provide an excuse to dismiss the tumour incidences as “spontaneous” and as not relat­ ed to glyphosate exposure, as Williams and col­ leagues did.

The IARC judged that there is strong evidence that glyphosate causes both genotoxicity and oxidative stress.þ In contrast, Brusick and col­ leagues attempted to deny that oxidative stress is a mechanism for carcinogenicity, stating, “The evidence for oxidative stress/damage as a mechanism or predictor of carcinogenesis is unconvincing”ûÿ. With this blanket statement, Brusick and colleagues largely avoided dealing with the existing evidence for the generation of oxidative stress by glyphosate. They also failed to provide evidence for their deviating view.

While the authors do not conceal that differ­ ent strains of rat were used in different stud­ ies (the strains are identified in the footnotes to the table), they group together study data from different rat types in a way that consti­ tutes bad scientific practice. Of the eight stud­ ies presented in their table, three are from studies performed with Wistar rats and five with Sprague-Dawley rats.

Brusick and colleagues’ denial that oxidative stress is a mechanism for carcinogenicity is in clear contradiction to the opinion expressed by

Conclusion

a number of scientists who have reviewed oxi­ dative stress as a mechanism of carcinogenicity in recent years.

Our analysis shows that the key industry-spon­ sored reviews defending glyphosate’s safety suffer from a number of scientific shortcom­ ings. Specifically, they utilize manipulations such as apparently calculated omissions, mis­ representation of facts, and the introduction of irrelevant data to confuse the picture and deny the scientific evidence.

For example, Klaunig and colleagues stated that oxidative stress “may cause DNA, protein and/or lipid damage leading to changes in chromosome instability, genetic mutation and/ or modulation of cell growth that may result in cancer.”ûĀ Deferme and colleagues emphasized that they “demonstrated the eminent role of oxidative stress in chemical carcinogenesis”.üø And Cacciapuoti wrote that recent research in oxidative stress and tumour genesis suggests that “free radicals control various aspects of tumor development including inflammation, transformation, survival, proliferation of can­ cers’ cells, invasion, angiogenesis, and metasta­ sis”.üù

For example, the Intertek papers prominently accuse IARC of being selective with the data. But we show that the authors of these papers ignore IARC’s transparent and carefully justi­ fied approach for study selection, use hair-split­ ting examples to construct a biased selectivi­ ty by IARC, but then make a biased selection themselves. And even more importantly, they distort and/or conceal inconvenient facts and turn evidence upside-down to support their ar­ guments.

In fact, an increase of oxidative stress param­ eters associated with the administration of glyphosate (the active ingredient) has been reported in seven publications using zebrafish, mice, rat and human (in vitro) test systems.

These authors claim to have used a “weight of evidence” approach to assess whether glypho­ sate is carcinogenic or not. However, in reality they avoid a true weight of evidence approach, which would take a holistic view on the differ­ ent lines of evidence. These different lines of evidence are:

In total, the IARC reviewed ûú papers concern­ ing the effects of glyphosate and/or glypho­ sate-based formulations (GBFs) on oxidative stress, seven of them on only the active ingre­ dient, glyphosate. Almost all of the ûú papers demonstrated an increase in oxidative stress af­ ter exposure to glyphosate or GBFs. In contrast, Brusick and colleagues reviewed only ùû such publications.

• The results of animal studies

• The outcome of epidemiological data

• Considerations of possible mechanisms of carcinogenesis.

While Brusick and colleagues themselves missed úú papers taken into consideration by IARC, they criticized IARC for missing three pa­ pers in their review (one of them actually sup­ porting IARC’s conclusion). Clearly they were following the central theme of this Monsan­ to-sponsored series of publications – accusing IARC of “selectivity” in their review.

The case is particularly strong if these differ­ ent lines of evidence complement each other. For instance, the finding of a significantly in­ creased incidence of malignant lymphoma in three mouse studies is complementary to the association between glyphosate exposure and non-Hodgkin lymphoma in humans (farmers and private users).

Altogether evidence exists in all three areas of consideration:

• Animal studies: Significantly increased tumour incidences were seen in male mice (for renal tumours, three studies;

for haemangiosarcoma, two studies; and for malignant lymphoma, three studies). This – according to the CLP regulation (EC ùúÿú/úøøĀ)üú – qualifies glyphosate as a category ùB carcinogen, which would re­ sult in a ban in the EU.

• Epidemiology: Limited but available evi­ dence points to a positive association be­ tween glyphosate exposure and non-Hod­ gkin’s lymphoma.

• Mechanisms: Genotoxicity and oxidative stress caused by glyphosate have been identified as possible mechanisms of car­ cinogenicity.

A holistic consideration of the existing evi­ dence inevitably leads to the conclusion that glyphosate is carcinogenic. Instead, the Mon­ santo-sponsored authors considered the differ­ ent lines of evidence separately, used false ar­ guments, and concealed or distorted the facts, while claiming to strengthen their arguments.

As will be seen in Chapter ý, this approach is remarkably similar to that used by the German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR) and the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) to conclude that glyphosate is not carcinogenic. It is legitimate to question where this similarity comes from.

That is especially the case as these incorrect and misleading conclusions in turn became the basis for the CLH proposalùþ that lays the sci­ entific basis for ECHA’s conclusion on the car­ cinogenicity and mutagenicity of glyphosate, expected as early as March úøùÿ.

Chapter û

The Intertek papers were authored by mem­ bers of the Glyphosate Expert Panel, convened by the industry consultancy firm Intertek under commission from Monsanto. Monsanto paid Intertek to convene and facilitate the panel’s work.ù

Individual con­ flicts of interest among defenders

The authors of the Intertek papers are listed on Monsanto’s web page on the Glyphosate Expert Panel under their public affiliationsù – for example, with universities or research insti­ tutes.

of glyphosate

Twelve out of the ùþ panel members have served as consultants to Monsanto and/or have been employed by the company.ù Others have different conflicts of interest with industry or industry-linked bodies, as revealed by the pan­ el members’ personal CVs (curriculum vitae), which can be downloaded from Monsanto’s website,ù and other sources given below.

Individuals who have played key roles in de­ fending the safety of glyphosate and its com­ mercial formulations include:

• Members of the Monsanto-financed Gly­ phosate Expert Panelù

• Alan Boobis and Angelo Moretto, the chair and co-chair of the Joint Food and Agri­ culture Organization/World Health Orga­ nization (FAO/WHO) Meeting on Pesticide Residues (JMPR) for glyphosate, which de­ cided that that glyphosate is “unlikely to pose a carcinogenic risk to humans from exposure through the diet”ú (see Chapter ý for details)

For one member of the panel, Michele Burns, we were unable to find any conflicts of interest apart from the fact that she was a member of the Glyphosate Expert Panel.

Links with the International

Life Sciences Institute (ILSI)

• Roland Solecki, currently head of the “Safety of Pesticides” department respon­ sible for the health assessment of glypho­ sate at BfRû (see Chapter ý for details).

Some Glyphosate Expert Panel members have links with the International Life Sciences Insti­ tute (ILSI), an organization funded by industry, including Monsanto, Dow, and BASFùø – all com­ panies that manufacture and/or market glypho­ sate herbicides. ILSI promotes industry-friendly “scientific” concepts and methodologies to be used in the risk assessment of foods, chemicals, and other industrial products.ùù

However, these individuals have serious con­ flicts of interest with industry, which are often not clear to members of the public and media. Details are below.

The Glyphosate

ILSI has proved highly controversial. People who have worked for ILSI on certain substances are no longer allowed on expert panels dealing with those substances at the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), after the authority instituted new independence rules.ùú In úøùú EFSA carried out a partial purge of experts with strong ILSI links, though some collaborations with ILSI are still tolerated, according to a re­ port by Corporate Europe Observatory.ùû

Expert Panel

As we have seen in the previous chapters, the Intertek papers defending the safety of glypho­ sateü, ý, þ, ÿ specifically aimed to counter the find­ ings of the World Health Organization’s cancer agency IARC that glyphosate is a probable car­ cinogen and that evidence for its genotoxicity is “strong”.

“Independent” yet convened

Intertek papers published in

with Monsanto money

industry-linked journal

In spite of the clear pro-industry bias of the Glyphosate Expert Panel and the fact that it was convened by Intertek with Monsanto mon­ ey, the panelists were claimed in the Intertek papers to be “independent”.þ, ü The panel was also characterized as “independent” in a media attack on the IARC verdict on glyphosate.ùü

All of the Intertek papers, as well as the re­ view by Greim and colleagues (úøùý)ùþ claiming that glyphosate was non-carcinogenic, were published in the same journal: Critical Reviews in Toxicology.

Sixteen years previously, another journal, Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology, published a paper defending glyphosate as non-carcinogenicùÿ by the former Monsanto consultant and recent Glyphosate Expert Panel member Gary Murray Williamsù and colleagues.

One of the Intertek papers carries the dis­ claimer: “Neither any Monsanto company em­ ployees nor any attorneys reviewed any of the Expert Panel’s manuscripts prior to submission to the journal.”þ However, this does not rule out the possibility that an Intertek employee or another person trusted by Monsanto per­ formed this role.

Both Critical Reviews in Toxicology and Regu­ latory Toxicology and Pharmacology are noto­ rious for their industry ties.

And with people who have formerly served as consultants to, and employees of, Monsanto among the Intertek papers’ authors, it is ques­ tionable as to whether any current Monsanto employees or attorneys were needed in order to ensure that the conclusions were favourable to the company.

Together with the scientific consulting firm, the Weinberg Group (see “Douglas Weed” in “Individual conflicts of interest: The Glypho­ sate Expert Panel”), Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology was investigated in úøøĀ by US Congressional Representative John Dingell over its role in the Food and Drug Adminis­

tration (FDA) decision allow­ ing the endocrine-disrupting chemical bisphenol A in in­ fant formula and other foods. Dingell wrote that “several scientists” had noted “appar­ ent conflicts of interests, lack of transparency, and absence of editorial independence” at the journal.ùĀ, ùā

What is a conflict

fessional judgment or action that relates to a primary in­ terest is unduly influenced by a secondary interest.”ùý

of interest?

In order to analyze the role of conflicts of interest in re-evaluations of glyphosate, we first need to define what a conflict of interest is. For the purpose of this analysis we agree with the definition of conflicts of interest of the Association of the Scientific Medical Societies (Arbeits­ gemeinschaft der Wissen­ schaftlichen Medizinischen Fachgesellschaften e.V.) in Germany:

In the context of different scientists’ evaluations of a pesticide, primary interests can be understood as scien­ tific rigour and objectivity. Secondary interests may in­ clude corporate affiliations, dependencies, and loyalties. These may or may not involve financial incentives, as well as social motives such as ca­ reer advancement or scientif­ ic recognition. The conflict of interest occurs when the primary and secondary inter­ ests collide.

An investigation by the Center for Public Integrity in úøùþ not­ ed that both Regulatory Toxi­ cology and Pharmacology and Critical Reviews in Toxicology have been accused by critics of peddling “junk science”. The Center stated that these jour­ nals publish “misleading, indus­ try-backed articles that threaten public health by playing down the dangers of well-known tox­ ic substances such as lead and asbestos. The articles often are used to stall regulatory efforts and defend court cases.”úø

“Conflicts of interest are defined as circumstances that create a risk that pro­

The Center found that half of all review articles written by scientists employed by the industry consulting firm Gradient since ùāāú were pub­ lished either in Critical Reviews in Toxicology or in Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology. No other journal came close.úø

Application of Genomics to Mechanism Based Risk Assessment, Rapporteur, Geno­ toxicity Working Group

• úøøþ–present: Invited member, Steering Committee ILSI Risk Science Institute, HESI Emerging Issues Subcommittee on the Rel­ evance and Follow-up of Positive Results in In Vitro Genetic Toxicity Testing, now Ge­ netic Toxicology Technical Committee.ù

Canadian anti-asbestos activist Kathleen Ruff called both journals “egregious examples” of the problem of industry influence. She said, “You’d have to be delusional to not recognize that the issues they’re dealing [with] and poli­ cies they’re setting won’t affect the profits of very powerful sources. Creating doubt is an endless activity and, in the meantime, people die unnecessarily.”úø

John Acquavella

John Acquavella is a former employee of Monsantoù (ùāĀā–úøøüÿ), where he “served as a member of Monsanto’s executive scientist core”, “led industrywide programs with fund­ ing by relevant trade associations”, and “did original research in support of Monsanto’s busi­ nesses”. Other former industry posts include head of epidemiology at the biopharmaceu­ tical company Amgen and at the oil, gas, and chemical giant Exxon. He has won two awards from Monsanto and one from the pesticide in­ dustry association CropLife America.ù

Jennifer Sass, a senior scientist at the Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental group, commented on the apparent pro-indus­ try bias at the two journals: “The harm is that it actually muddies the independent scientific lit­ erature. They’re stacking their weight on their side of the scale.”úø

That is arguably the aim of the Monsan­ to-sponsored onslaught against the IARC ver­ dict on glyphosate.

As part of his employment at Monsanto, he published peer-reviewed data on glyphosate.ù

Together with other Glyphosate Expert Panel members David Garabrant, Gary Marsh, Tom Sorahan and Douglas L. Weed, Acquavella was first author on an Intertek paper concluding that there was no causal link between gly­ phosate and the cancer types non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and multiple myeloma.ÿ The paper specifically contradicted the IARC’s findings of “limited evidence” of carcinogenicity and a “positive association” with non-Hodgkin’s lym­ phoma.úú

Conflicts of interest of Glyphosate Expert Panel

members

Marilyn Aardema

Marilyn Aardema has her own consultan­ cy firm, which provides “expert solutions” to chemical companies and industry associations, among others, “in support of human safety assessments”.ù She is the former chief scientif­ ic officer at BioReliance Corporation,ù which provides testing and manufacturing services to pharmaceutical, biotechnology, and chemical companies.úù

Sir Colin Berry

Sir Colin Berry has previously served as a con­ sultant to Monsanto.ù He is a co-author on one Intertek paper concluding that “glyphosate is not a carcinogen in laboratory animals”ü and another concluding that “glyphosate is unlikely to pose a carcinogenic risk to humans”.þ

Aardema is a co-author on two of the Intertek papers defending the safety of glyphosate.ý, þ

Aardema’s ILSI roles include:

Berry is a member of the American Council on Science and Health,ù a front group for the tobacco, agrochemical, fossil fuel, pharma­ ceutical and other industries,úû, úü which has

• ùāāā–úøøü: ILSI Health and Environmental Sciences Institute (HESI) Subcommittee on

received funding from Monsanto and other agrochemical firms.úû, úý He sits on the advisory board for the Scientific Alliance,ù a UK-based organization which was set up by the lobbying firm Foresight Communications and which pro­ motes anti-environmentalist and pro-industry views.úþ, úÿ

studies sponsored by the tobacco industry claiming that even extreme exposure to sec­ ond-hand smoke was safe for humans.ûþ, ûÿ

From ùāāý to úøøý Brusick occupied senior positions at Covance. According to his CV, he managed its global toxicology business and “increased the productivity and operating prof­ its of Covance toxicology businesses by úøø% during a ý year period from ùāāý–úøøø.”ù

Berry is also a member of the advisory council of Sense About Science,ù a UK-based charitable trust which says its aim is to challenge “the mis­ representation of evidence in public life”,úĀ but which has consistently lobbied in favour of ge­ netically modified (GM) cropsúā and defended the safety of glyphosate.ûø

Michele Burns

Michele Burns is a co-author on two of the In­ tertek papers defending glyphosate’s safety.ü, þ

In úøøā Sense About Science was exposed as failing to disclose the industry links of some of the authors of its guide to GM foods, “Making sense of GM”ûù – and as failing to disclose that one author was Andrew Cockburn, Monsanto’s former director of scientific affairs.ûú

Joao Lauro Viana de Camargo

Joao Lauro Viana de Camargo has previous­ ly served as a consultant to Monsanto.ù He is a co-author on two of the Intertek papers de­ fending glyphosate’s safety.ü,þ

Sense About Science has received funding from firms and organizations with interests in biotechnology – for example, AstraZeneca, the John Innes Centre, and Rothamsted Research.úā, ûû

De Camargo is a member of the Scientific Con­ sulting Committee of ILSI/Brazil. He has also served as a consultant or ad hoc referee to the following chemical companies: BASF, Bayer, DuPont, Monsanto, Ihara, and Adama.ù All of these companies manufacture and/or market glyphosate herbicides.

David Brusick

David Brusick has previously served as a con­ sultant to Monsanto; to “major pharmaceuti­ cal and chemicals companies”; to the chemical manufacturers’ trade association, the American Chemistry Council; and to ILSI.ù He is a co-au­ thor on two of the Intertek papers defending glyphosate’s safety.ý, þ

Moreover, De Camargo has served as a con­ sultant or ad hoc referee to the Brazilian gov­ ernment agency CTNBio,ù which as at March úøùü had approved fifty GMOs for cultivation in the country, the most widely planted being glyphosate-tolerant soy.ûĀ Brazil is the second largest grower of GM crops after the US.ûā It could therefore be argued that if De Camargo were to come up with an unfavourable verdict on glyphosate’s safety, he would be condemn­ ing the prior decision of an agency in which he has served, perhaps even a decision that he contributed to, and that he could potentially share moral responsibility for the consequences of that decision.

From ùāĀý to ùāĀþ he occupied a senior posi­ tion at Hazleton Biotechnologies,ù a subsidiary of Hazleton Laboratories, a company that pro­ vided animal testing services for new drugs, cos­ metics, pesticides, and industrial chemicals and that analyzed new compounds for the pharma­ ceutical, chemical, and food industries.ûü

Brusick moved to the parent company, Ha­ zleton Laboratories, in ùāĀþ,ù remaining there after it became Corning Hazleton in ùāĀÿ. In ùāāý Corning spun off a section of its business as Covance Laboratories.ûü As well as drug de­ velopment services, Covance offers toxicology testing to the chemical, agrochemical and food industries.ûý In the ùāāøs, Covance performed

Serving in CTNBio could in itself be considered a conflict of interest, given the reportedly ex­ treme pro-GMO attitude of the agency. In his book, The Politics of Precaution: Genetically Modified Crops in Developing Countries, Rob­ ert L. Paarlberg notes, “Unfortunately, CTNBio

is still required by the ùāāý law to include rep­ resentatives from the private biotechnology companies, so the corporate conflict of interest issue remains.”üø

Greim told the committee, “I must say, I re­ ally don’t understand at all what all the fuss is about… It [glyphosate] does not cause can­ cer.”üú

Paarlberg adds, “Because CTNBio retains its reputation as a cheerleader for GM crops, it has had trouble finding independent representa­ tives from Brazil’s consumer protection move­ ment” to sit on the commission.üø

But an investigation by the German political TV programme Monitor, which is broadcast monthly on the public TV channel ARD, re­ vealed that Greim is not independent and has close links to industry.üú

In úøùý Greim co-authored a review on the carcinogenic potential of glyphosate with Da­ vid Saltmiras, an employee of Monsanto.ùþ The review concluded, “glyphosate does not pres­ ent concern with respect to carcinogenic po­ tential in humans”. Greim was paid by Monsan­ to for providing his expertiseùþ yet claimed that this fact did not influence the results.üú

David Garabrant

David Garabrant has previously served as a consultant to Monsanto.ù He is a co-author on two of the Intertek papers defending the safety of glyphosate.þ,ÿ He serves on a scientif­ ic advisory board to Dow AgroSciences, which markets pesticides including glyphosate, and has consulted on behalf of Bayer Corporation on litigation matters concerning glyphosate and leukemia.ÿ He has received research grants from Dow Chemical Company and Dow Agro­ Sciences.üù

Oliver Krischer, Member of the German Parlia­ ment (Alliance āø/The Green Party – Bündisāø/ Die Grünen) and deputy leader of the parlia­ mentary group, commented: “Anyone who writes paid reports for the agricultural corpo­ ration Monsanto cannot, to my mind, be con­ sidered an independent expert in the field of glyphosate and plant pesticides.”üú

Helmut Greim

Helmut Greim is Professor Emeritus at the Technical University Munich, Germany. He has previously served as a consultant to Monsan­ to and, as part of that consulting relationship, published peer-reviewed data regarding gly­ phosate.ù He is a co-author on two of the In­ tertek papers defending glyphosate’s safety.ü, þ

So how did Greim come to be invited to a par­ liamentary committee as an independent ex­ pert? Hermann Färber, Member of the German Parliament (CDU), Committee for Nutrition and Agriculture, said: “The scientists we invite from the EU are independent – otherwise there’s no way we’d invite them.”üú

Greim has been awarded the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany, the coun­ try’s highest honour, for his contribution to the protection of people and the environment.üú

The Monitor reporter pointed out, “Mr Gre­ im is being paid by Monsanto and fully rep­ resents the views held by that company. So it is difficult to see how he is independent.” But Färber dodged the questions about Greim’s in­ dependence, stating: “It’s not what Mr Greim says that’s the deciding factor, anyway – what matters is what the regulatory authorities have to say.”üú

From ùāāĀ to úøøĀ Greim was an affiliate of ILSI’s Health and Environmental Safety Insti­ tute (HESI) and from úøøù–úøøú he was chair of board of trustees for that organization.ù

On úĀ September úøùý Greim appeared be­ fore the Agriculture Committee of the Ger­ man Parliament as a supposedly independent expert, invited by the CDU/CSU parliamentary group. The committee was discussing glypho­ sate, following the IARC’s classification of the chemical as a probable carcinogen. Greim gave it the all-clear.üú

Long before Greim took to defending glypho­ sate, he did the same for dioxins and PCBs, sub­ stances that are now accepted as highly toxic. Professor Erich Schöndorf, an environmental lawyer and a former prosecuting attorney in a court case on the issue, said of Greim: “He was a phoney expert. He didn’t deserve to be recognized as an ‘expert’ or ‘subject specialist’.

He clearly stood on the manufacturer’s side and had nothing to do with impartial scientific methodology.”üú

sate-based herbicides “do not appear to pres­ ent significant genotoxic risk under normal conditions”.üā The review was published in the industry-linked journal Critical Reviews in Toxi­ cology (see below).

In úøùû Greim co-authored a scientific paper defending the “azole” class of fungicides,üû which have endocrine disrupting properties.üü The paper was supported by BASF (which manufactures an “azole” fungicide) through the consultancy firm RJKA.üû Greim has also co-authored a paper defending the safety of fragrance ingredients as part of research sup­ ported by the Research Institute for Fragrance Materials, an industry body funded by the man­ ufacturers of fragrances and consumer prod­ ucts containing fragrances.üý And he co-au­ thored a Monsanto-funded paper defending the company’s MONĀþû genetically modified maize against the findings of a re-analysis of the company’s own data.üþ The re-analysis, by scientists working independently of the GMO industry, had reported potential signs of liver and kidney toxicity in rats fed the GM maize.üÿ

Kier was a member of an ILSI Risk Science Insti­ tute Working Group on Transgenic Animals in Carcinogenicity Testing (ùāāý).ù

David Kirkland

David Kirkland has previously served as a con­ sultant to Monsanto and, as part of that con­ sulting relationship, published peer-reviewed data regarding glyphosate.ù He is a co-author on two of the Intertek papers defending the safety of glyphosate.ý, þ

Like David Brusick, Kirkland is a veteran of di­ visions of the drug development and industry toxicity testing firms Hazleton Laboratories and Covance. Between ùāāø and ùāāÿ he occupied senior positions at Hazleton Microtest and Ha­ zleton Europe; from ùāāÿ to úøøā he was “Vice President of Scientific and Regulatory Consult­ ing” at Covance Laboratories Europe (CLE), “responsible for the pharmaceutical regulatory affairs group and expert reviews (consultancy). This includes developing and promoting the regulatory and scientific expertise within CLE to ‘add value’ to client projects.”ù

In February úøùÿ it emerged that Greim is a member of a key European committee that is responsible for setting limits for workers’ expo­ sure to carcinogenic substances, the Scientific Committee on Occupational Exposure Limits (SCOEL). An investigation for the French news­ paper Le Monde found that the majority of the SCOEL’s experts (ùý out of úú) have links with in­ dustrial sectors directly involved with substanc­ es evaluated by the committee. But according to the European Commission, Greim had “no” conflicts of interest, in spite of his membership of the Glyphosate Task Force and his role as a consultant for the chemical company BASF.üĀ

Kirkland was the chair of the Peer Consulta­ tion Workshop on Genotoxicity for Categori­ zation of “Inherent Toxicity” to Humans under the Canadian Environmental Protection Act (CEPA ’āā), co-sponsored by ILSI and Health Canada, in úøøú.ù

Larry Kier

Gary Marsh

Larry Kier was employed by Monsanto from ùāÿÿ to úøøø and held a number of senior posts at the company. As part of that employment, he published peer-reviewed data regarding glyphosate.ù He is a co-author on two of the Intertek papers defending the safety of glypho­ sate.ý, þ

Gary Marsh is a co-author on two of the In­ tertek papers defending glyphosate’s safety.þ, ÿ

He has a long history of conducting research for polluting industries on the health effects of risky or known toxic substances, such as form­ aldehyde and man-made mineral fibre. In the ùāÿøs and ùāĀøs he received research funding from the chemical companies Monsanto, Du­ Pont, and American Cyanamid, all of which market or have marketed (in the case of the

Together with another Glyphosate Expert Panel member, David Kirkland, in úøùû Kier published a review of the scientific literature that concluded that glyphosate and glypho­

latter) glyphosate products, as well as oil and energy giants Shell and Mobil. He has served as a consultant to industry (including the glypho­ sate manufacturer Dow Chemical) and other bodies since the ùāāøs.ù

Roberts is, or has been, a member of the Ac­ ceptable Daily Intake and Food Chemical Intake task force at ILSI. For his PhD research, he col­ laborated with a research programme spon­ sored by ILSI and the Calorie Control Council, an international association representing the low- and reduced-calorie food and beverage industry.ù He is a member of the International Society of Regulatory Toxicology and Pharma­ cology (ISRTP), which the Center for Media and Democracy’s Sourcewatch website flagged up for its “list of presidents and vice presidents” who are “mostly tireless workers for the tobac­ co industry. This organisation was often run by tobacco’s favourite scientists who were willing to work for them on the quiet.”þù

In ùāĀø he received research funding from Monsanto to investigate deaths among chemi­ cal workers exposed to formaldehyde. In ùāĀā– āù he received funding from the Formaldehyde Institute,ù an industry organisation with mem­ bers including Monsanto and Dow Chemical,ýø to re-analyseù a National Cancer Institute study of industrial workers that found a link between exposure to formaldehyde and cancer.ýù, ýú, ýû

Marsh was the first listed author on a series of papers, published in the industry-linked journal Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology (see below), that attempted to counter, dismiss, or minimize the National Cancer Institute’s find­ ings.ýü, ýý, ýþ One of these papersýþ specifically challenges the IARC’s úøøü decision to classify formaldehyde as a known carcinogen, which was based in part on the National Cancer Insti­ tute’s data.ýÿ

Keith Solomon

Keith Solomon has previously served as a con­ sultant to Monsanto and, as part of that con­ sulting relationship, published peer-reviewed data regarding glyphosate.ù He is the authorĀ and co-authorþ of two of the Intertek papers defending the safety of glyphosate. He was a member of the ILSI Technical Committee on Aggregate Exposure from úøøø to úøøü and is a member of the ILSI HESI committee (July ùāāĀ– present). He is currently a member of the ILSI subcommittee on Cumulative Risks and Prob­ lem Formulation for Cumulative Risks.ù

In úøùø Marsh wrote to the National Toxicol­ ogy Program’s (NTP) Report on Carcinogens (RoC) Center protesting against the expert panel’s recommendation to list formaldehyde as a known human carcinogen. Marsh castigat­ ed the panel for its “blatant and unsubstanti­ ated omission” of his papers from its report.ýĀ Marsh’s lobbying did not succeed and in úøùù the NTP published its “Twelfth report on car­ cinogens”, upgrading formaldehyde from “rea­ sonably anticipated to be a human carcinogen” to “known to be a human carcinogen”.ýā

Solomon was a member of the CropLife Amer­ ica Science Forum and Panel on Weight of Evi­ dence (May úøùú).ù CropLife America is a “trade association that represents the manufacturers, formulators and distributors of pesticides”.þú In úøøü, CropLife poured funding into a campaign to try to defeat a Mendocino County ballot ini­ tiative – known as Measure H – that would make the country the first to ban genetically modi­ fied (GM) cropsþû (around Āý% of GM crops are engineered to tolerate glyphosate herbicideþü). In the lead-up to the vote, CropLife contribut­ ed over $ýøø,øøø – more than seven times that of the initiative supporters – in an (ultimately unsuccessful) attempt to defeat the proposal.þû

Ashley Roberts

Ashley Roberts has previously served as a con­ sultant to Monsanto and is currently an em­ ployee of Intertek.ù He is a co-author of one of the Intertek papers defending the safety of glyphosate.þ

For ten years until úøøù he was the scientific and regulatory affairs manager for the food giant Tate & Lyle,ù which uses “innovative tech­ nology to turn raw materials into distinctive, high quality ingredients”. It operates primarily in two areas: corn wet milling and high-intensi­ ty sweeteners.þø

Tom Sorahan

Tom Sorahan has served as a consultant to Monsanto and, as part of that consulting re­ lationship, published peer-reviewed data re­

garding glyphosate. He is a co-author on two of the Intertek papers defending the safety of glyphosate.þ, ÿ His research has been sponsored by Monsanto to the tune of over £ýø,øøø.ù

has anything to do with whether or not the as­ sociation [between exposure to a certain chem­ ical and a disease] really exists.

“The bottom line is that I could almost get any outcome I want from an uncertainty anal­ ysis. Certainly, Blair and colleagues (úøøā) sug­ gest this is the case and, I believe, also correctly point to the fact that this is likely to increase the false negative rate”þÿ [a false negative is when a toxic effect exists but is missed due to poor analytical methodology].

Douglas Weed

Douglas Weed is a co-author on two of the Intertek papers defending the safety of gly­ phosate.þ, ÿ He is the founder and managing member of DLW Consulting Services, LLC, a consultancy firm that specializes in providing expert advice and guidance on problems at the interface of science, law, commerce and public policy.ù

Weed occupied “advisory positions” at ILSI HESI from úøøü to úøøý and at ILSI from úøøø– úøøû.ù

DLW Consulting Services, LLC was one of the participating organisations, alongside chemi­ cal and GM seed giants Bayer, Dow Chemical, DuPont, Monsanto, and Syngenta, in the ILSI HESI Subcommittee on Evaluating Causality in Epidemiologic Studies (úøùú–ùû).þý The sci­ entific paper produced by this subcommittee was authored by employees of Dow Chemical, Monsanto, Bayer, DuPont, Syngenta, and Exx­ on Mobil, as well as an affiliate of ILSI HESI and employees of the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).þþ

From úøøÿ to úøøĀ Weed was Vice President for Epidemiology and Biostatistics at the Wein­ berg Group in Washington DC.ù The Weinberg Group is a scientific consulting firm that, in the words of David Roberts in a úøøĀ article for Vanity Fair, “works for chemical companies to manufacture uncertainty about the health and environmental effects of chemicals, with the aim of fighting off regulatory and legal chal­ lenges. Lest you think that description melodra­ matic, it’s worth reading the letter Weinberg sent DuPont on that company’s battle over Teflon [a substance used in non-stick cooking pans that gives off toxic fumes when heatedþĀ]. It describes how Weinberg would ‘harness, fo­ cus and involve the scientific and intellectual capital of our company with one goal in mind – creating the outcome our client desires.’”þā

The paper, titled “Evaluating uncertainty to strengthen epidemiologic data for use in hu­ man health risk assessments”,þþ is ostensibly about improving the strength of epidemiolog­ ical studies for use in human risk assessments. However, it appears to be heavily focused on manufacturing doubt about the reliability of epidemiological studies. It makes the criteria for acceptability so unrealistically stringent that no epidemiological study would be judged acceptable for informing risk assessments.

The Weinberg Group, together with sever­ al other industry-linked outfits (see “Glypho­ sate-defending papers published in indus­ try-linked journals” below), was the subject of an investigation by US Congressional Represen­ tative John D. Dingell (D-Mich.), chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, over its role in the Food and Drug Administra­ tion (FDA) decision allowing the endocrine-dis­ rupting chemical bisphenol A in infant for­ mula and other foods. In a statement, Dingell said, “The tactics apparently employed by the Weinberg Group raise serious questions about whether science is for sale at these consulting groups, and the effect this faulty science might have on the public health.”þā

Christopher J. Portier, an invited specialist to the IARC Working Group on glyphosate and former director of the Agency for Toxic Sub­ stances and Disease Registry, USA, commented on this paper, “Quantification of uncertainty is itself uncertain, so where do you stop the pro­ cess? If I do not know something precisely, I must make assumptions about the uncertainty in that thing in order to characterize the over­ all uncertainty. That makes the uncertainty es­ timate itself very uncertain. And none of that

The JMPR panel

Gary Murray Williams, MD

Alan Boobis and Angelo Moretto

Gary Murray Williams has served as a consul­ tant to Monsanto and, as part of that consult­ ing relationship, published peer-reviewed data regarding glyphosate.ù Williams is a co-author on threeý,ü,þ of the Intertek papers defending the safety of glyphosate.ý, ü, þ, ÿ, Ā

Alan Boobis is a professor at the Faculty of Medicine at Imperial College London.ÿù He was chair of the Joint Food and Agriculture Organi­ zation/World Health Organization (FAO/WHO) Meeting on Pesticide Residues (JMPR) for gly­ phosate, which decided that that glyphosate is “unlikely to pose a carcinogenic risk to humans from exposure through the diet”.ú The co-chair was Professor Angelo Moretto,ÿú an associate professor at the Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences “Luigi Sacco”, University of Mi­ lan.ÿû

Williams has a long history of publishing arti­ cles defending glyphosate. In úøøø he was the first author of a review that concluded, “Gly­ phosate is noncarcinogenic… the use of Round­ up herbicide does not result in adverse effects on development, reproduction, or endocrine systems in humans and other mammals… un­ der present and expected conditions of use, Roundup herbicide does not pose a health risk to humans.”ùÿ Interestingly, a co-author of the review was Ian C. Munro of industry consultan­ cy Cantoxùÿ (now Intertekÿø).

Soon after the JMPR published its opinion, it became embroiled in a bitter row about con­ flicts of interest. It emerged that Boobis was the vice-president of ILSI Europe. In úøùú the ILSI group received a $ýøø,øøø (£ûüü,úûü) dona­ tion from Monsanto and a $ýúĀ,ýøø donation from the industry group Croplife International, which represents Monsanto, Dow, Syngenta, and others. Moretto was a board member of the ILSI Health and Environmental Sciences In­ stitute (HESI), and of its Riskúù steering group, which Boobis also co-chairs.ÿú See further de­ tails of this story in Chapter ý.

Funding is not mentioned in the review but Monsanto employees are credited for their “significant contributions” and “scientific sup­ port”. Monsanto is thanked for giving access to its toxicological data,ùÿ which has generally been kept hidden from the public and scientific community as a commercial secret.

Williams’s many ILSI roles stretch over úÿ years, from ùāĀû to úøùø. They include:ù

The consultant pathologist

• ùāāû–úøøý: Member, Board of Trustees, ILSI Health and Environmental Sciences In­ stitute (HESI). Chair, Membership Develop­ ment Committee, úøøú–úøøû.ù

Marvin Kuschner: Saviour of

glyphosate?

Marvin Kuschner, MD was Dean of the School of Medicine, State University of New York at Stony Brook,ü from ùāÿú until ùāĀÿ.ÿü

• úøøþ–úøøÿ: Member, Expert Group on the Application of the Margin of Expo­ sure (MOE) Approach to Genotoxic Car­ cinogens in Food. ILSI – European Branch.ù MOE is a concept promoted by ILSI in risk assessment that would allow genotoxic (DNA-damaging) substances to remain on the European market even though the EU authorities aim to eliminate exposures be­ cause no safe level is known.ùù

Kuschner was a key actor in the US EPA’s deci­ sionÿý not to classify glyphosate as carcinogenic (see the full story in Chapter ú). He is referred to in a Monsanto-sponsored Intertek paper by Williams and colleagues that concluded, “gly­ phosate is not a carcinogen in laboratory an­ imals”. Williams and colleagues named Kus­ chner as one of the “peer review experts” who in ùāĀý re-examined the renal (kidney) tumours found in mice in a Monsanto study on glypho­ sate.û Kuschner claimed to have found a new renal tumour in a control mouse, no. ùøúĀ.ÿÿ, ÿĀ

• úøøā–úøùø: Corresponding member, Ex­ pert Group of the Risk Assessment of Geno­ toxic Carcinogens in Food Task Force. Data selection for BMD modelling of genotoxic and carcinogenic substances. ILSI – Europe­ an Branch.ù

Neither the US EPA’s pathologist, nor the pa­

thologists of the laboratory that had conduct­ ed Monsanto’s mouse study, could confirm the existence of Kuschner’s alleged new tumour.ÿā If confirmed, it would effectively remove the significant increase found in Monsanto’s origi­ nal study in tumour incidence between glypho­ sate-exposed and control groups of animals, thus exonerating glyphosate from the accusa­ tion of carcinogenicity. Kuschner’s claimed find­ ing enabled three more individual pathologists hired by Monsanto and a “Pathology Working Group” (PWG), who all reported directly to Monsanto, to conclude that the renal tumours were not related to glyphosate treatment but were due to chance.ÿĀ It is not known on whose orders the PWG members were recruited or who paid them, if anyone. Finally, in ùāāù, the EPA classified glyphosate as non-carcinogenic.ÿþ

ville employee, in which he argued that the employee’s death from cancer was not caused by exposure to asbestos.Āø

Kuschner was also reportedly a trusted ally of another polluting company. A newspaper report about an Eastman Kodak-owned plant that severely polluted groundwater in Roches­ ter, New York noted that Kuschner was chair of a panel convened by the company to review the evidence on methylene chloride, the chemical at the centre of the controversy, and to judge whether it posed a health risk to residents.Āù

Confusing anecdote with scientific evidence, Kuschner stated, “The bottom line is that when the panel members were asked if they would be content to live in an atmosphere that con­ tained what Rochester’s contained, the answer was ‘absolutely’.” Presumably this claim was never tested, insofar as the panel members were not forced to live in the area.Āù

Williams and colleagues carefully note Kus­ chner’s academic affliliation.ü But sources available on the Internet raise the question of whether Kuschner also had conflicting interests and allegiances with industry, which are unde­ clared by Williams and colleagues.

Head of pesticide

safety at BfR

According to his biographical entry in Pra­ book, by ùāÿā Kuschner was a member of Mon­ santo’s Biohazards Commissionÿþ (possibly the same body as the company’s “biohazards com­ mittee”, referred to in a lawsuitÿÿ).

Roland Solecki

Roland Solecki is head of the “Safety of Pes­ ticides” department responsible for the health assessment of glyphosate at BfR. He has also been a member of the Scientific Committee of the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) since úøùý. He was involved in the first Europe­ an approval procedure for glyphosate in Ger­ many and at the EU level as an employee of the then Federal Institute for Consumer Health Protection and Veterinary Medicine (BgVV). He was one of the JMPR experts who adopted a úøøü report setting limits for the acceptable daily intake of glyphosate, in which it was clas­ sified as non-carcinogenic. See Chapter ý for details.

The same source lists Kuschner (date unspeci­ fied), who was a specialist on lung cancer, as a consultant to the asbestos manufacturer Johns Manville Company,ÿþ which faced hundreds of thousands of lawsuits relating to asbestos-re­ lated diseases.ÿĀ In ùāāü, along with the former Monsanto consultant and Glyphosate Expert Panel member Gary Murray Williams and oth­ ers, Kuschner co-published a scientific paper defending the safety of asbestos in the air of public buildings. The paper, which does not declare the conflicts of interest of the authors, concluded, “leaving well-maintained asbestos in place is considered to be the best course.”ÿā This would certainly be the least expensive course for the industry, enabling it to avoid lia­ bility for the costs of removal.

Solecki has worked with industry representa­ tives for years – until at least úøùý – and has long-standing links with ILSI (see Chapter ý).

Kuschner was an expert witness in a lawsuit (the judgment was handed down in ùāÿā) brought by the widow of a former Johns Man­

Conclusion

There is clear evidence of strong conflicts of interest among people who have defended glyphosate and glyphosate-based herbicides, while downplaying or hiding evidence of the risks of these chemicals.

Because we cannot read people’s minds, it is difficult to prove that someone’s view of gly­ phosate’s safety has been influenced by their industry interests.

However, as seen in Chapter ù (“How the reg­ ulatory system fails the public”), there is a great deal of evidence showing that industry-linked scientific papers are more likely to find that the product in question is safe.

In addition, in Chapter ú, we showed that many of the scientific papers defending gly­ phosate’s safety are based on bad scientific practices. The conclusions of these papers con­ sistently exonerate glyphosate herbicides from suspicion of harmfulness, in contradiction to the conclusions of many studies authored by scientists working independently of the indus­ try.

Therefore we conclude that conflicts of inter­ est have led to bad scientific practices, which are closely correlated with conclusions of “no harm” from glyphosate herbicides.

Chapter ü

In order to understand the argument that fol­ lows, we first need to define hazard and risk. There is a difference between the two. As the World Health Organization’s (WHO) cancer agency IARC explains: “An agent is considered a cancer hazard if it is capable of causing cancer under some circumstances. Risk measures the probability that cancer will occur, taking into account the level of exposure to the agent.”Ā

Bad science of the regulatory

authorities

In lay terms, a hazard is something that can potentially cause harm, such as falling off a lad­ der. A risk is the likelihood that this will really happen.

On úø March úøùý the World Health Organi­ zation’s cancer agency IARC published its ver­ dict that glyphosate is a probable human car­ cinogen and that there is strong evidence that it is genotoxic.ù Monsanto quickly hit back with strong denials.ú, û

IARC restricts its assessment of pesticides, in­ cluding glyphosate, to a hazard evaluation. Risk assessments are performed by regulatory or other expert bodies. They take exposure into account, but they must be based on a prior haz­ ard evaluation.* Hazard evaluation is the vital first step to better inform the risk assessment.

The company gained support from several reg­ ulatory agencies and expert bodies, including:

• BfR (Germany’s Federal Institute for Risk Assessment), which concluded on ûù Au­ gust úøùý that “no hazard classification for carcinogenicity is warranted”ü

In Europe the process ends with the hazard assessment and no risk assessment is done, in cases where a pesticide is classified as a ùA or ùB carcinogen.ā This is because known or pre­ sumed human carcinogens are considered so dangerous that human exposure is not allowed at any dose.

• The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), which, based on BfR’s report, con­ cluded on ùú November úøùý that glypho­ sate is “unlikely to pose a carcinogenic hazard to humans”ý

Based on its hazard evaluation, IARC judged glyphosate to be a probable human carcino­ gen.ù But BfRü and EFSAý disagreed, giving gly­ phosate a clean bill of health with regard to carcinogenicity. The BfR stated that “no hazard classification for carcinogenicity is warranted” (p. āú)ü and EFSA concluded that glyphosate is “unlikely to pose a carcinogenic hazard to hu­ mans”.ý The JMPR concluded that glyphosate is “unlikely to pose a carcinogenic risk to humans from exposure through the diet”.þ

• The Joint Food and Agriculture Organi­ zation/World Health Organization (FAO/ WHO) Meeting on Pesticide Residues (JMPR), which announced in May úøùþ that glyphosate is “unlikely to pose a car­ cinogenic risk to humans from exposure through the diet”þ

• The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), which in May úøùþ published a doc­ ument on its website stating that glypho­ sate was “not likely carcinogenic” before removing it, stating that it had been pub­ lished in error prior to finishing the agen­ cy’s review of the chemical.ÿ

Why did BfR, EFSA, and the JMPR disagree

with IARC?

In the current chapter we examine the quality of the scientific arguments used by these agen­ cies in their assessments.

The first and fundamental problem with BfR’s and EFSA’s assessment is that, in contrast with

IARC, they failed to perform a proper hazard evaluation for glyphosate. This has important implications, because if a carcinogenic hazard is acknowledged, the risk assessment will be fun­ damentally different. By omitting the fact that glyphosate is carcinogenic, the authorities can continue to allow the use of glyphosate and declare it “safe”. If glyphosate were labelled as a category ùB carcinogen, its authorization in the EU would be forbidden.ā

(p. ùøü, Table û.þ.ù) the results of rodent car­ cinogenicity studies are the basis for the haz­ ard evaluation.ùù Risk assessment may follow, based on exposure assessments and other con­ siderations, if legislation allows the marketing of carcinogenic compounds. In Europe, in prin­ ciple, it does not for category ùA or ùB carcino­ gens,ā as explained above.

If BfR had used the rodent carcinogenici­ ty studies for a rigorous hazard evaluation, it would have had no choice but to admit that glyphosate poses a category ùB carcinogenic hazard – thus triggering a ban in Europe.

BfR confuses hazard and risk

“

If BfR had used the rodent carcino­ genicity studies for a rigorous hazard eval­

BfR’s and EFSA’s denial of the carcinogenic hazard of glyphosate essentially invalidated their risk assessment. They seem to try to con­ ceal this shortcoming by blurring the difference between risk assessment and hazard evalua­ tion.

uation, it would have had no choice but to admit that glyphosate poses a category ùB carcinogenic hazard – thus triggering a

ban in Europe.”

For instance, in a statement published on its website, BfR claimed that the difference be­ tween IARC’s and their own assessment was because “IARC only made the first step of an assessment of the health risk, which in case of glyphosate has been completed by the Europe­ an authorities as well as the JMPR by relating the potential health hazards to the anticipated glyphosate exposure from agricultural use”ùø (our emphases).

BfR’s and EFSA’s assessment

mired in contradictions

The hazard evaluation made by BfR and EFSA (EFSA based its conclusion on BfR’s report) is entangled in contradictions, making it a prime example of bad science. First BfR acknowledged and did not deny IARC’s judgments, but then flatly stated that “There was no evidence for a carcinogenic potential of glyphosate noted in any of the studies performed in rats and mice” (p. úü) and that “classification and labelling for carcinogenicity is not considered appropriate” (p. úĀ).ùú

This is clearly misleading. In reality, IARC’s hazard evaluation was fundamentally different from that of BfR’s and EFSA’s. That is why those authorities did not “complete” the hazard evaluation made by IARC, but simply denied it. They claimed that glyphosate does not pose a carcinogenic hazard, and performed a risk as­ sessment that ignores the carcinogenic hazard.

The steps involved in some of the contradic­ tions are below.

BfR also confused hazard and risk in attempt­ ing to dismiss the results of rodent carcinoge­ nicity studies, the majority of which showed that glyphosate did cause an increase in cancer (see below). BfR claimed: “In summary, based on the data from five carcinogenicity studies in mice and seven chronic toxicity and carcino­ genicity studies in rats, the weight of evidence suggests that there is no carcinogenic risk”ü (emphasis by BfR).

Step 1: BfR admits significant

increase in tumour incidence in

animal experiments

After the cancer research agency IARC found “sufficient” evidence of a carcinogenic effect of glyphosate in the same four industry studies (two studies with rats and two with mice)ù in which BfR had previously not been able to de­ tect any evidence of cancer activity, the German

But according to Regulation (EC) ùúÿú/úøøĀ

“

authority had to re-evalu­ ate its reportùû and amend its inadequate statistical analysis of the animal car­ cinogenicity studies.

BfR admitted the existence of three lines of evidence for glyphosate’s carcinogenicity: animal, mechanistic, and epidemio­

logical studies. But instead of considering the whole picture in a true “weight of evidence” fashion, BfR separated out the lines of evidence, pretending they were isolated phenomena, to deny them

individually, one by one.”

As a result, BfR was forced to confirm the sta­ tistically significant tumour findings noted by IARC in all four studies. Also, in the remain­ ing three mouse studies of the manufacturers, BfR had to admit the existence of statistically significant and dose-dependent increases in tumours, which it had previously overlooked. Overall, BfR reported a total of ùù statistical­ ly significant increases of tumour incidences in glyphosate-treated animals in five mouse and two rat studies.ü BfR’s amended analysis was detailed in an Addendum to its initial report dated ûù August úøùý.ü In the Addendum, BfR finally agreed with IARC: “The statistical analy­ sis by IARC was confirmed” (p. üü).ü

This is in agreement with IARC, which also identified oxidative stress as a mechanism for glyphosate’s carcinogenic effects.ù

Step 3: BfR agrees with IARC on

epidemiological evidence for

carcinogenicity

Regarding the epidemiological data on gly­ phosate-based herbicides and cancer, BfR stat­ ed: “Based on the studies on cancer in humans IARC concluded: ‘There is limited evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of glyphosate’.” It should be noted that under the IARC classifi­ cation system, “limited” is the second strongest category of evidence, after “sufficient”.

As an explanation for its colossal error, the BfR admitted that “initially” it had “relied on the statistical evaluation provided [by the glypho­ sate manufacturers] with the study reports” (p. ûþ).ü The statistical analysis provided by indus­ try was not in accord with current Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) guidanceùü and therefore had found statistical significance only in a single mouse study.

BfR continued, “RMS [Rapporteur member state] agrees with IARC that the other IARC categories (evidence suggesting lack of car­ cinogenicity, inadequate evidence of carcino­ genicity and sufficient evidence of carcinoge­ nicity) are not suitable for the classification of the evidence from studies in humans.”ü More specifically, BfR stated, “Following the logic of the classification system of IARC, the RMS can accept this interpretation.”ü

This failure of the German authority is partic­ ularly explosive because the hazard-based ap­ proach in the EU pesticide regulation forbids the authorization of an active substance as soon as there are positive cancer findings in at least two independent animal studies.ā

Thus BfR agreed with IARC’s conclusion that epidemiological studies provided “limited” ev­ idence for glyphosate’s carcinogenicity. That means, in IARC’s definition, that “A positive association has been observed between expo­ sure to the agent and cancer for which a caus­ al interpretation is considered by the Working Group to be credible, but chance, bias or con­ founding could not be ruled out with reason­ able confidence.”ùý

Step 2: BfR admits mechanism for

glyphosate’s carcinogenicity

BfR identified a mechanism through which glyphosate could cause cancer –oxidative stress. It stated that the “uncoupling or inhibition of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation also represents an established mechanism for ROS [reactive oxygen species] generation. Notably, uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation by glyphosate has been reported in rat liver mic­ rosomes.”ü

Step 4: Reverse gear: BfR denies

what it has already admitted

BfR admitted the existence of three lines of

evidence for glyphosate’s carcinogenicity: ani­ mal, mechanistic, and epidemiological studies. But instead of considering the whole picture in a true “weight of evidence” fashion, BfR sep­ arated out the lines of evidence, pretending they were isolated phenomena, to deny them individually, one by one.

or carcinogenic activity in humans cannot be deduced for glyphosate and glyphosate based formulations”ü (our emphasis). BfR omits the fact that this is not a “sole ob­ servation” – it is well supported by animal and epidemiological evidence.

• Epidemiological studies: BfR acknowl­ edged the existence of “limited” epi­ demiological evidence that glyphosate herbicides are carcinogenic. It also ac­ knowledged a mechanism that can explain glyphosate’s carcinogenic action. Yet turn­ ing its back on the evidence, it followed the industry-sponsored review by Acqua­ vella and colleagues (úøùþ)ùþ in denying the significance of this evidence, based on the “no effect” finding from a single study, the Agricultural Health Study.ùÿ However, as explained in Chapter ú, this study had too short a followup period to allow the necessary time for the cancer in question (non-Hodgkin lymphoma) to develop from glyphosate exposure.

The process was as follows:

• Animal studies: BfR acknowledged that five mouse and two rat studies demon­ strated a statistically significant increase in one or more tumour incidences per study. It even listed these studies, together with the error probabilities showing statistical significance, in its Addendum.ü Yet in spite of all this, BfR still concluded, “It should be avoided to base any conclusion only on the statistical significance of an increased tu­ mour incidence identified in a single study without consideration of the biological significance of the finding”ü (our empha­ sis). Exactly how BfR could redefine seven studies showing statistically significant in­ creases of tumour incidences in glypho­ sate-treated animals as “a single” study is a mystery. It has nothing to do with science.

BfR’s reasons for mixing the concepts of haz­ ard evaluation and risk assessment are unclear, but the resulting confusion has two effects:

1. It distracts the reader from drawing the in­

“

evitable and correct conclusion – that gly­ phosate poses a carcinogenic hazard.

Exactly how BfR could redefine seven studies showing statistically signif­

icant increases of tumour incidences in glyphosate-treated animals as “a single”

2. Blurring the distinction between hazard

and risk opens an “escape route” in the scientific debate and enables a contra-fac­ tual conclusion. The irrefutable evidence coming from carcinogenicity and mecha­ nistic studies, as well as epidemiology, are admitted – yet at the same time they are denied with references to “risk”. The im­ plication is that the hazard is insignificant because the risk is supposedly negligible. However, this is an upside-down argu­ ment, since as we have seen, the risk can only be properly calculated on the basis of a prior hazard assessment.

study is a mystery. It has nothing to do

with science.”

• Mechanistic studies: BfR also admitted the existence of a mechanism for carcinogenic­ ity of glyphosate. But then, in a statement that is so confused as to be meaningless, BfR claimed that “the mechanistic and oth­ er studies do not provide further evidence for a carcinogenic mechanism” because of “the absence of sufficient evidence for a carcinogenic risk related to the intended herbicidal uses”.ü BfR also stated with re­ gard to the mechanistic evidence: “From the sole observation of oxidative stress and the existence of a plausible mech­ anism for induction of oxidative stress through uncoupling of mitochondrial ox­ idative phosphorylation alone, genotoxic

BfR’s genotoxicity

contradictions

IARC concluded that there was “strong” ev­ idence that glyphosate and glyphosate-based formulations are genotoxic (damage DNA). In

Tables ü.ù–ü.þ of its report, IARC summarized the findings of ýā published studies on glypho­ sate, its formulations, and its metabolite AMPA. Unequivocal results were obtained in ùøý tests described in these publications and þý demon­ strated genotoxic effects. IARC concluded that there is “strong evidence that glyphosate caus­ es genotoxicity”.ù

ly recommends further genotoxicity studies in compliance with OECD test guidelines in gener­ al and for representative formulations” (p. iv)ü – perhaps suggesting that it lacked confidence in its own conclusion.

BfR made prominent reference to the Glypho­ sate Task Force-sponsored review by Kier and Kirkland (úøùû).ùĀ In Volume ùùā (p. ýÿ) as well as in Volume û Annex B.þùû (p. üøý) of the Renewal Assessment Report, BfR echoed the conclusion drawn by Kier and Kirkland: “The authors con­ cluded that an overwhelming preponderance of negative results in well-conducted bacterial reversion and in vivo mammalian micronucleus and chromosomal aberration assays indicates that glyphosate and typical GBFs [glypho­ sate-based formulations] are not genotoxic in these core assays.”

BfR, in its Addendum to the Renewal Assess­ ment Report (RAR), listed the results of üù in­ dustry studies (not accessible to the public, in­ cluding IARC) and ùÿ published studies, ùþ of which were also considered by IARC. According to the Addendum, none of the industry stud­ ies showed any genotoxicity, while þú% of the ûü test results for glyphosate described in these ùÿ publications did show genotoxicity. Howev­ er, despite this evidence, BfR concluded “that glyphosate does not induce mutations in vivo and no hazard classification for mutagenicity is warranted”ü (p. üā).

The “preponderance of negative results” does not seem to be that overwhelming, given that BfR “strongly” recommended further genotox­ icity studies in the Addendum. While such a precautionary approach is welcome, the ques­ tion arises as to why this did not translate into BfR’s acceptance of the evidence of a mecha­ nism for glyphosate’s carcinogenicity.

How did BfR reach this conclusion? Apparent­ ly through a technical dodge that allowed it to exclude damning evidence.

According to Regulation ùúÿú/úøøĀ, for cate­ gorization of a substance as a mutagenic haz­ ard, in vivo evidence in mammals is needed, while for the assessment of mutagenic activity as a mechanism for carcinogenicity, such a re­ quirement does not exist.ùù

An important aspect of the “preponderance” is the “negative results in well-conducted bac­ terial reversion” assays, i.e. ùþ negative Ames Tests using Salmonella typhimurium. While dis­ missing the genotoxic effects of in vivo studies in rodents because of too-high dose levels, BfR gave no consideration to the fact that glypho­ sate is a broad-spectrum antibiotic (US patent

Neither in the RARùû nor in the Addendumü did BfR take a position on the mutagenic po­ tential of glyphosate as mechanistic evidence for carcinogenici­ ty. Instead BfR hid behind the hazard classification for mu­ tagenicity, with its specific requirement for positive effects in mammals. This made it possible for BfR to exclude eight studies listed by IARC that demonstrated in vivo geno­ toxic effects of glyphosate in fish, fruit flies, and plants (Table ü.ý)ù – as they were not con­ ducted in mammalian systems.

number ÿÿÿùÿûþúø) and an “antimicrobi­ al agent” (US patent number úøøüøøÿÿþøĀ Aùúù). It has been known for over ûø years that “the test­ ing of antibiotics in bacteria is a very du­ bious procedure”.úú Moreover, the Ames Test is not considered suit­ able for testing antibiotics.úû

“

To the public’s detriment, BfR, once again entangled in contradictions, reached

an opposite conclusion to IARC on the genotoxicity of glyphosate, using exactly the

same arguments as the Monsanto-linked and Glyphosate Task Force-funded Kier and

Kirkland study.”

BfR ignored these important issues and accept­ ed bacterial tests as evidence of a presumed lack of glyphosate’s genotoxic potential, with­ out qualifying or questioning its conclusion. In addition, BfR did not hesitate to reproduce

Surprisingly, however, even after BfR conclud­ ed that “glyphosate does not induce mutations in vivo”ü (p. iii),ü it still stated that it “strong­

industry’s (unproven) opinion that it “is “due to cytotoxicity rather than DNA interaction” when “DNA damage effects at high (toxic) dose levels” were observed (Volume ù,ùā p. ýÿ).

Statistical evaluation of the study revealed a significant increase in the incidence of malig­ nant lymphoma when a trend test is applied (p=0.006633) and also a significant increase by pairwise comparison (p=0.02820), according to the EPA's own evaluation (Fisher’s Exact Test and Exact Trend Test Results).

Thus to the public’s detriment, BfR, once again entangled in contradictions, reached an oppo­ site conclusion to IARC on the genotoxicity of glyphosate, using exactly the same arguments as the Monsanto-linked and Glyphosate Task Force-funded Kier and Kirkland study.ùĀ

This seemingly posed a problem to the CARC, and the way the CARC dealt with it was simi­ lar to the way it was dealt with in Europe. In essence, the other mouse studies and historical control data (data from untreated animals in other studies) were used to discredit the crys­ tal-clear result in the Nufarm study, on the claimed basis that “malignant lymphomas were not seen in the other three studies in this strain of mice”.25

EPA fails to report significant results of malig­

nant lymphoma

The “final report” of the US EPA’s Cancer Assessment Review Committee (CARC) on the “Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Potential of Glyphosate”25 was posted on the EPA’s web­ site for a short time in May 2016.7 The CARC was chaired by a top-ranking EPA official, Jess Rowland.25 Its report offers insights into how the EPA handled scientific data to come to the conclusion that glyphosate is “not likely to be carcinogenic in humans”. The way in which it dealt with a specific type of cancer, malignant lymphoma, in mouse studies can be considered emblematic.

A fourth study in a different strain of mice (Swiss Webster), which also showed a dose-de­ pendent and significant increase in malignant lymphomas (Feinchemie Schwebda 2001), was excluded from further consideration because of an alleged virus infection in the colony.25 However, the European authorities came to the conclusion that “in the study report itself, there was no evidence of health deterioration due to suspected viral infection and, thus, the actual basis of EPA’s decision is not known”26 (p.72). Neither does the CARC report offer a basis for this decision.

Looking at the data of the available mouse studies leads clearly to the conclusion that gly­ phosate causes an increase in malignant lympho­ ma, a tumour affecting the lymphatic system, as does non-Hodgkin lymphoma in humans.

Thus three other studies remained which were used to claim that observation of a dose-de­ pendent, significant increase in malignant lym­ phomas in the Nufarm-study was irrelevant, because of an alleged absence of malignant lymphomas.25 First of all it needs to be stressed that contrary to CARC’s claim, malignant lym­ phomas were seen in two of the other three studies. The third study (Knezevich and Hogan

1983) was of limited use, because their classifi­ cation of tumours of the lymphatic system was less specific and therefore could not be com­ pared. All this can easily be derived from the documents of the European authorities.14, 20, 26

The EPA’s CARC itself pointed out that in one study (cited as Nufarm 2009b and referred to as Wood 2009 by the European authorities) “for the malignant lymphomas there was a trend and pairwise significance”.25

The reported incidence of malignant tumours in this study was:

• control group: 0/51 (0%)

However, in common with the European au­ thorities, CARC failed to acknowledge that the Atkinson and colleagues 1993 study was severe­ ly compromised because the histopathological assessment of malignant lymphomas suffered from restricting it to lymph nodes with macro­ scopic changes (p. 68).25

• low dose group: 1/51 (2%)

• medium dose group: 2/51 (4%)

• high dose group: 5/51 (10%)

Finally, for the Arysta 1997 study, CARC shied away from using applicable OECD guidance.15 The CARC report actually shows that the incidence of lymphoma in males was statistically significant when the trend test was used, but focused on pairwise tests, emphasizing in its conclusion that “there were no statistically significant pairwise differences”25 (p. 73). It should be remembered that OECD Guidance No. 116 explicitly recom­ mends the use of a trend test for such compari­ sons and in addition points out that “either kind of test” (i.e. trend or pairwise) is considered suffi­ cient to accept statistical significance.15

The ùúû-page report contains a ùø-page sec­ tion on glyphosate, of which less than one page is dedicated to results of animal carcinogenicity testing and another page to epidemiological results concerning non-Hodgkin lymphoma.þ Citations and references to the scientific liter­ ature or other data sources are not provided.

The report was published in May úøùþ, but the corresponding monograph on glyphosate is still pending. The report did not specify de­ tails of the studies relied on, such as tumour incidences or error probabilities. It offered just two sentences concerning the increased incidence of malignant lymphoma in glypho­ sate-treated mice: “The Meeting concluded that there is equivocal evidence of induction of lymphomas in male mice in three out of seven studies and in female mice in one out of sev­ en studies at high doses (ýøøø–üø,øøø ppm, equal to Āùü–üûüĀ mg/kg bw [bodyweight] per day). The Meeting also noted that in the other three studies in which even higher doses (up to ýø,øøø ppm, equal to ÿüÿø mg/kg bw per day) had been used, no effect was observed.”þ

Perhaps for added certainty, CARC also used historical control data to dismiss the significant and dose-dependent increase in malignant lymphoma in the Nufarm study. In similar fash­ ion to the European authorities, CARC ignored the strong recommendation by the OECD and other guidance documents of a highly restric­ tive use of historical control data. According to these guidance documents, historical control data should be derived from studies performed in the same laboratory, in the same strain of mice, within the last five years prior to the study in question. None of these criteria was fulfilled for the Nufarm study, because such data were not available. Instead CARC used a large pool of historical control data assembled from studies conducted in various laboratories over a large period of time.

No further explanations or references were given.

The lack of detail in the JMPR report demon­ strates its low quality. It also demonstrates an absence of transparency, since the lack of ref­ erences means that independent scientists can­ not examine the JMPR’s sources and assess how the panel members reached their conclusions.

In summary, the US EPA’s CARC used simi­ lar methods as the European authorities to “cleanse” a database which otherwise would have led to the conclusion that glyphosate is carcinogenic in laboratory animals. In contrast with Europe, the interference of the industry (i.e. Monsanto) in the US EPA’s decision-making process is well documented (see Chapter 5).

Nevertheless, unlike BfR and EFSA, JMPR did not completely deny the carcinogenic hazard posed by glyphosate. In its conclusion, the JMPR panel stated: “The Meeting concluded that gly­ phosate is not carcinogenic in rats but could not exclude the possibility that it is carcinogenic in mice at very high doses”þ (our emphasis).

Lack of detail in

JMPR report

Conclusion

Last year the results were published of the Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide Resi­ dues (JMPR), held from ā–ùû May úøùþ in Gene­ va, Switzerland.þ Interest groups in favour of a continued authorization of glyphosate refer to this document as “the other WHO” document, which, in contrast to IARC’s report, contends that glyphosate does not pose a carcinogenic risk.

BfR agreed with IARC on the three lines of evidence for the carcinogenic potential of gly­ phosate (human, animal, and mechanistic evi­ dence).

Notably, BfR agreed with IARC’s judgments that rodent carcinogenicity studies showed sig­ nificant increases in malignant lymphoma in

glyphosate-treated animals, and that human epidemiological studies show an association between exposure to glyphosate herbicides and Non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Thus these two lines of evidence support one another in that they indicate glyphosate’s carcinogenicity in the same organ, lymphatic tissue. In addition, BfR agreed with IARC that oxidative stress was a plausible mechanism for glyphosate’s carcino­ genic effects.

But then, contradicting the totality of evi­ dence, BfR denied the chemical’s carcinogenic­ ity.

In this process, BfR blurred the distinction be­ tween risk and hazard, drawing a veil of confu­ sion over its claims on glyphosate.

Both BfR and EFSA failed to perform a proper hazard evaluation for glyphosate – an omission that enabled them to sidestep the data from rodent carcinogenicity studies showing a link between glyphosate exposure and cancer.

These bad scientific practices have led to sci­ entifically inaccurate conclusions on glypho­ sate. These conclusions put public health at risk by enabling the continued use of glyphosate herbicides.

Chapter ý

the approval for a limited period until the Eu­ ropean Chemicals Agency (ECHA) concludes its review of glyphosate’s carcinogenicity.ý

Institutional con­ flicts of interest in

The chronology of the ùāāû–úøøú approval procedure was as follows.

In ùāāû, several companies, including Mon­ santo, Zeneca, Feinchemie Schwebda and Dow, submitted an application for the European ap­ proval of glyphosate. Germany was appoint­ ed by the EU Commission as the rapporteur member state, responsible for reviewing the documentation submitted by the companies. The core questions posed in this review were whether there were health or environmental risks which indicated that the substance should not be placed on the market. Germany for­ warded the results in the form of a draft report to the relevant EU authorities. The rapporteur country thus played – and continues to play – a central role in the entire approval process.

regulatory and

expert bodies

In the previous chapter, we saw that industry’s contention that glyphosate is not carcinogenic gained support from several regulatory agen­ cies and expert bodies, including the BfR (Ger­ many’s Federal Institute for Risk Assessment),ù the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA),ú the Joint Food and Agriculture Organization/ World Health Organization (FAO/WHO) Meet­ ing on Pesticide Residues (JMPR),ú and the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).û

In Germany, the following authorities were re­ sponsible for the risk assessment of glyphosate and for compiling the draft assessment report:

However, reports on glyphosate issued by these bodies are marred by serious conflicts of interest, dating back to the time of the chemi­ cal’s first European approval and before.

• The Federal Biological Research Cen­ tre for Agriculture and Forestry (Biolo­ gische Bundesanstalt für Land- und Forst­ wirtschaft, or BBA)

First glyphosate approval

• The Federal Institute for Consumer Health Protection and Veterinary Medicine (Bundesinstituts für gesundheitlichen Ver­ braucherschutz und Veterinärmedizin, or BgVV), responsible for health assessment, and

in the EU

Research by the NGO BUND (Friends of the Earth Germany) shows how glyphosate was ap­ proved for the European market and how sub­ sequent approvals allowed it to remain there. The following history is condensed and trans­ lated from BUND’s report, which at the time of writing is only available in German.ü

• The German Environment Agency (Um­ weltbundesamt, or UBA, responsible for environmental assessment.

The environmental and health risks of the pesticide “active substance” glyphosate were examined for the first time under an EU-wide framework from ùāāû to úøøú. Glyphosate was already on the market at the time. It was sub­ jected to the EU’s new assessment procedure and allowed onto the EU market from úøøú for ten years. After the licence expired in úøùú the EU adopted several extensions without a risk assessment, prolonging the approval until midúøùþ. Then the Commission further extended

The German report on glyphosate was com­ pleted in ùāāā, with a recommendation to authorize glyphosate in the EU. From ùāāā to úøøø, the draft report was subjected to a Eu­ ropean peer review procedure under the ECCO (European Community Co-ordination for the Evaluation of Active Substances) project. Ulti­ mately in úøøù, the EU Commission’s Standing Committee on Plant Health decided to include glyphosate in the list of authorized pesticide active substances.

BUND identified three main problems with this review process:

quently assessed the plausibility and quali­ ty of their own assessment as employees of an EU project.”

1. Closeness of the BBA to industry: The BBA

had a close relationship with industry, col­ laborating with agrochemical companies on the development of commercial prod­ ucts and on applications for patents on products. BUND commented, “We do not know whether or in which way the BBA co­ operated with the companies that wanted to market glyphosate. But the clearly vis­ ible, fundamentally lacking demarcation with industry suggests that there was little awareness in the authority about possible conflicts of interest.”

These double roles of committee mem­ bers constitute a clear conflict of interest, as employees of these agencies are highly unlikely to contradict and invalidate their own previous decision.

3. Studies showing harmful effects from gly­

phosate were dismissed: In a report pub­ lished in June úøùù,þ a group of scientists coordinated by the organization Earth Open Source (EOS) raised serious accu­ sations against the EU and above all the German authorities over their role in the review process of glyphosate. Thus, ac­ cording to EOS research, several industry animal feeding studies from the ùāĀøs and ùāāøs show that glyphosate causes mal­ formations in fetuses – not only at high, but also at medium and low doses. The authors of the study demonstrated that the BBA and the EU Commission knew of these studies during the initial authoriza­ tion procedure. However, the results were either ignored or rejected by the German authorities during the approval process for unscientific reasons. The results of the stud­ ies did not appear in the final report of the EU Commission on glyphosate.ÿ Also, the BBA recommended a high acceptable dai­ ly intake (ADI) for glyphosate (ø.û mg/kg of bodyweight per day), even higher than that recommended by one of the industry applicants (ø.øý mg/kg of bodyweight per day.). A peer-reviewed version of EOS’s re­ port was published in úøùú.Ā

2. Double roles in committees: After Germa­

ny had completed its draft report in ùāāā, it was submitted to the ECCO team. The team had the task to coordinate the Euro­ pean peer review process for the evalua­ tion of pesticide active ingredients, to pre­ pare appropriate meetings and to pass the results from the peer review procedure to the EU Commission in the form of a report.

The problem with this arrangement from the public interest point of view was that most of the ECCO managers consisted, in addition to representatives from the UK’s Pesticide Safety Directorate or PSD, of BBA and BgVV employees. Both German au­ thorities, together with the British PSD, also chaired the ECCO meetings in which the evaluation reports from the rappor­ teur were discussed by experts.

BUND reports, “The representatives of German authorities involved in the ECCO project were the former President of the BBA, Prof Fred Klingauf, Hans-Gerd Nolt­ ing (BAA), Henning Bruno (BBA), Martin Streloke (BBA), Rudolf Pfeil (BgVV) and Roland Solecki (BgVV).”

In July úøùù BfR responded to the report, calling it “a challenging document raising a lot of questions that should be taken very seriously. An adequate response to the criticism and the many accusations in the report would require a general discussion of the established paradigms for the toxi­ cological evaluation of chemicals… These general discussions should be initiated by the Commission before we start with the re-evaluation of glyphosate.”ā However, these discussions did not take place.

BUND points out, “Overall, there is a prob­ lematic situation with regard to the evalu­ ation of the active substance glyphosate: Employees of the BBA and BgVV assessed a plant protection product as represen­ tatives of a German authority and subse­

“

Overall, there is a problematic situation with regard to the evaluation of the active substance glyphosate: Employees of the BBA and BgVV assessed a plant protection product

as representatives of a German authority and subsequently assessed the plausibility and

quality of their own assessment as employees of an EU project.”

– BUND (Friends of the Earth Germany)

BUND concluded, “The proximity to industry, the non-inclusion of critical study results as well as the double roles of personnel cast a shadow over the EU’s first authorization procedure for glyphosate. There is doubt as to whether the authorization was, as required, actually based on an independent and unbiased assessment of all scientific findings on the environmental and health risks of the active substance.”ü

• The Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR), which evaluates the health aspects of the active substance. In úøøú it became the most important successor of the Fed­ eral Institute for Consumer Health Protec­ tion and Veterinary Medicine (BgVV)

• The German Environment Agency (UBA), which assesses the impact on the ecosys­ tem

Current re-evaluation of glyphosate: The German

• The Julius Kühn Institute (JKI), which as­ sesses practical application and benefits as well as efficacy.ü

authorities

In an Addendum to the Renewal Assessment Report, dated ûù August úøùý, the German au­ thorities concluded that a carcinogenic classifi­ cation for glyphosate was not warranted.ù

The EU re-registration process for glypho­ sate has been ongoing since úøùú. The EU has postponed its final decision until the Europe­ an Chemicals Agency (ECHA) comes up with its verdict on glyphosate’s carcinogenicity.ùø

EFSA then carried out a peer review of the German authorities’ report, which it published in November úøùý. EFSA concluded that gly­ phosate is “unlikely to pose a carcinogenic haz­ ard to humans” and that the acceptable daily intake (ADI) level could be raised from ø.û to ø.ý mg/kg of bodyweight per day.

As in the first European approval procedure, industry chose Germany as the rapporteur member state in the re-evaluation – thus gen­ erating a major conflict of interest for an au­ thority and individual experts if they should find mistakes in their first “clean bill of health” for glyphosate.

Lack of transparency may

hide conflicts of interest

The úü companies that want glyphosate to be re-approved have joined together to form the Glyphosate Task Force. Monsanto submitted the dossier of studies and documents on behalf of the Glyphosate Task Force to the German author­ ities in support of the re-approval of glyphosate.ü

In light of the double roles played in the úøøú evaluation of glyphosate by individuals in the German authorities and subsequently at the EU level, in which these individuals effective­ ly reviewed their own decisions, it is essential that the names of those responsible for the current evaluation in the different authorities are made public. However, such transparency has been lacking in the current re-evaluation. Corporate Europe Observatory (CEO) reported that in response to its access to documents re­ quest, more than Āø% of the national experts involved in EFSA’s assessment of glyphosate refused to have their names disclosed to the public.ùù

In Germany, this time the following author­ ities are responsible for the re-evaluation of glyphosate:

• The Federal Office of Consumer Protection and Food Safety (BVL) as the lead agency (risk management). The BVL performs the tasks of the former Federal Biological Re­ search Centre for Agriculture and Forestry (BBA)

CEO noted, “The most striking outcome of this access to documents request was perhaps that not a single expert from the rapporteur state, Germany, was named. This is all the more prob­ lematic given that BfR has a policy allowing in­ dustry employees on its committees (its current pesticides committee for instance includes em­ ployees of chemical giants Bayer and BASFùú).”

could jeopardize the credibility of the initial assessment. In addition, personnel continuity raises the question of whether a changed view of the active substance is possible or whether individual assessment criteria influence the en­ tire assessment process.”ü

The details of these personnel continuity situ­ ations in different agencies are explored in this chapter.

CEO added, “BfR refused to comment on the identity of the five officials contributing to EF­ SA’s peer review (an anonymous source had sent five names to CEO, all BfR officials), stat­ ing that ‘BfR assessments in general are made by BfR staff’ and that ‘external experts from the BfR Committees merely advise BfR […] and were not involved at any stage in the re-assess­ ment of the active substance glyphosate’.”ùù

Federal Office for Consumer

Protection and Food Safety (Bundesamt für Verbraucher‑

schutz und Lebensmittel‑

sicherheit, or BVL)

Why such secrecy? CEO said, “No reason was provided.”ùù

The BVL, founded in úøøú, is responsible for the authorization of pesticides in Germany. It acts as coordinator in cases – including glypho­ sate – where Germany is the rapporteur mem­ ber state for a pesticide “active substance”. It controls the procedure and the partial evalua­ tions of the other participating authorities, the Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR), the Federal Environment Agency (UBA) and the Ju­ lius Kühn Institute (JKI).ü

Previous research by the journalist Stéphane Horel in collaboration with CEO found that al­ most þø% of experts sitting on EFSA’s panels had direct or indirect links with industries reg­ ulated by the agency.ùû Horel’s and CEO’s úøùû report, “Unhappy meal: The European Food Safety Authority’s independence problem”, identified major loopholes in EFSA’s indepen­ dence policy and found that EFSA’s rules for as­ sessing its experts, implemented in úøùú after several conflicts of interest scandals, had failed to improve the situation.ùü

The BVL performs the tasks of the former Fed­ eral Biological Research Centre for Agriculture and Forestry (BBA). Today the BVL’s department for plant protection products, which coordi­ nates evaluations of active substances (includ­ ing glyphosate), is the successor to the former BBA department for plant protection products. This results in a strong continuity of personnel who are central to the re-evaluation of glypho­ sate. The current Head of the Plant Protection Unit, Dr Martin Streloke, was involved in the first European approval procedure for glypho­ sate at both German and European level. His predecessor, Hans-Gerd Nolting, the BVL de­ partment head from úøøú to úøùü, took part in the first approval procedure in the ùāāøs both as a BBA and as an ECCO employee.ü

Since “Unhappy meal” was published, EFSA has revised its independence policy. However, CEO noted that “the worst problems remain”.ùý

Continuity of personnel and closeness to industry creates

conflicts of interest

Research by BUND shows how key people in the úøøú evaluation of glyphosate were still in place for the current re-evaluation, leading to a situation in which these individuals were effec­ tively reviewing their own previous decisions in favour of glyphosate. BUND commented: “There is a potential conflict of interest here, since the revision of one’s own assessment

Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (Bundesinstitut für Risikobewertung, or BfR)

the then Federal Institute for Consumer Health Protection and Veterinary Medicine (BgVV).ü

BfR’s closeness to industry

The Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR) is a scientific institution under the authority of the Federal Ministry of Food and Agriculture (Bundesministerium für Ernährung und Land­ wirtschaft, or BMEL). In addition to its statuto­ ry task of assessing the health risks of food and feedstuffs, consumer goods and chemicals, BfR also conducts its own research. In úøøú it be­ came the most important successor of the Fed­ eral Institute for Consumer Health Protection and Veterinary Medicine (BgVV).ü

On its website, BfR gives detailed information on the internal handling of conflicts of interest. According to the agency, the “independence of the experts from economic, political and social interests is a fundamental prerequisite for an objective, purely scientific fact-based risk as­ sessment.”ùā

In order to ensure this independence, addi­ tional activities must be reported by the em­ ployees to the BfR and “are subject to autho­ rization by the authorities in accordance with the relevant legal provisions”. If an activity leads to a conflict of interests, BfR states that the employee must refrain from the activity.ùā

In the re-evaluation procedure for glyphosate, BfR is responsible for the health assessment of the active substance. Since IARC classified gly­ phosate as “probably carcinogenic”,ùþ BfR’s previous safety assessment of glyphosate in the ùāāøs has been publicly discussed – and ques­ tioned – in Germany.ùÿ

However, according to BUND, BfR does not con­ sistently implement this policy: “Our research has shown that Roland Solecki has worked with industry representatives for years and until at least úøùý. In úøøþ, an influential publication by the ILSI Health and Environmental Sciences Institute (HESI) was published, in which Solec­ ki was named as co-author.úø The publication is about simplifying testing procedures for pesti­ cides. Other authors include representatives of all the major agricultural and genetic engineer­ ing companies (BASF, Bayer CropScience, Dow, DuPont, Monsanto, and Syngenta) and industry scientists.”ü

BfR’s new safety assessment of glyphosate for the current evaluation has also been severely criticized. The German toxicologist and co-au­ thor of this report Dr Peter Clausing said that BfR – and the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), which based its evaluation of glypho­ sateú on BfR’s reportùĀ, ù – appear to have com­ mitted scientific fraud in order to force the con­ clusion that glyphosate is not a carcinogen.ùÿ Details of the scientific problems with BfR’s re­ port were presented in Chapter ü.

Solecki was a workshop leader at an event organized by the European Center for Eco­ toxicology and Toxicology of Chemicals (ECE­ TOC).úù ECETOC is an association of chemical, agricultural and oil companies,úú where indus­ trial scientists develop (among other activities) toxicological concepts for the evaluation of chemicals.úû

Personnel continuity at BfR

As with BVL, a high level of continuity of per­ sonnel in the evaluation procedure for gly­ phosate is found in BfR, according to BUND. Persons who have previously been responsible for assessment of glyphosate at BfR’s predeces­ sor in the ùāāøs are also currently responsible in the authority. This is the case for Roland Solecki, currently head of the “Safety of Pesticides” de­ partment responsible for the health assessment of glyphosate at BfR, as well as for Rudolf Pfeil, the head of the Toxicology Group of Active Substances and their Metabolites in Solecki’s Division. Both were involved in the first Eu­ ropean approval procedure for glyphosate in Germany and at the EU level as employees of

Solecki was also a member of the Riskúù tech­ nical committee of ILSI HESI until at least úøùü.úü This industry-financed project aims to develop new procedures for the risk assessment of chemi­ cals.úý ILSI HESI was specifically designed to repre­ sent “such firms and corporations that are within or suppliers to the chemical, petrochemical, auto­ mobile and pharmaceutical industries”.úþ

Also present on the ILSI HESI technical commit­ tee on which Solecki served are scientists from Monsanto, Syngenta and Dow Chemicalúü – rep­ resentatives of companies that are applying to have glyphosate re-approved, the records of which have been evaluated by Roland Solecki’s department.

and concluded, “There is no evidence of car­ cinogenicity.”ûø

Research by BUNDü found that BfR represen­ tatives have been sitting for years in the JMPR – and even wrote JMPR assessment reports on glyphosate. This was the case for the úøøü JMPR report setting limits for the acceptable daily in­ take of glyphosate, in which it was classified as non-carcinogenic. The report was drafted for the JMPR by two BfR employees, Rudolf Pfeil and Lars Niemann.ûù Among the JMPR mem­ bers who adopted the report were the BfR staff members Roland Solecki and Ursula Banasiak, former head of BfR’s chemical safety depart­ ment and Solecki’s predecessor.ûú Also partici­ pating in a second JMPR report on glyphosate and its degradation product AMPA in úøùù (evaluation: glyphosate has no toxic effects)ûû was Rudolf Pfeil of BfR.ûü Roland Solecki and Ursula Banasiak of the BfR participated in the

BUND commented: “There is a clear conflict of interest in the fact that a leading public agency responsible for the independent assessment of company records is cooperating with represen­ tatives of the companies submitting these doc­ uments on new methods for verifying pesticide risks. The fact that BfR permits this cooperation is unacceptable and is in breach of its own in­ ternal rules for the prevention of conflicts of interest. Solecki has also been a member of the Scientific Committee of the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) since úøùý. In his con­ flict of interest statement for EFSA, his involve­ ment with ILSI HESI does not appear.”úÿ

report as JMPR experts.ûû

“

The question arises as to whether BfR’s ability to fulfill its legal

BUND commented, “If the BfR calls the JMPR an institution independent of the BfR, this is partly mis­ leading.” The NGO added that the two organizations are interdependent, due to the fact that “the same persons in national and international commit­ tees repeatedly confirm their own judgment”.ü

The question arises as to whether BfR’s ability to fulfill its legal man­ date is not only ham­ pered by its institutional conflicts of interest – but also by the obviously strong personal conflict of interest of the head of its pesticide department.

mandate is not only hampered by its institutional conflicts of interest – but

also by the obviously strong personal

conflict of interest of the head of its

pesticide department.”

Interestingly, in the middle of September úøùý, an expert task force of the WHO found that the JMPR had failed to consider “many studies, mainly from the published peer re­ viewed scientific literature” in its assessment.ûý,

JMPR is not independent of BfR

Since the evaluation of glyphosate as a proba­ ble carcinogen by IARC,ùþ BfR has substantiated its own safety assessment by referring to other European or international bodies which have also classified glyphosate as non-carcinogenic.úĀ Among them is the joint working group of the WHO and the World Food Organization FAO, the Joint Meeting on Pesticide Residues (JMPR), which concluded that glyphosate is “unlikely to pose a carcinogenic risk to humans from expo­ sure through the diet”.úā

ûþ The task force’s remit was to clarify how dif­ ferent assessments could be made within the WHO regarding the carcinogenicity of glypho­ sate, with the JMPR concluding that it was un­ likely to pose a carcinogenic risk through diet and the IARC concluding that it was probably carcinogenic.

The head of the task force was (remarkably) BfR department head Roland Solecki, accord­ ing to an email from Dr Philippe Verger MD, PhD, Department of Food Safety and Zoonoses, World Health Organization, sent to the WHO to the freelance researcher Almut Gaude.ûÿ The task force’s recommendations to the JMPR in­

JMPR has a history of performing glyphosate assessments that are favourable to industry. In ùāĀþ, just one year after the US EPA had clas­ sified glyphosate as a possible human carcino­ gen, JMPR also performed a cancer assessment

cluded (again remarkably) a complete re-eval­ uation of glyphosate, as well as revision of its previous guidelines on the inclusion of inde­ pendent studies.ûý BUND called the task force’s findings “a serious admission of a huge blind spot in the evaluation process for glyphosate”.ü

temporary licence to keep glyphosate on the market, without the support of a majority of EU countries, pending the decision of ECHA on the chemical’s carcinogenicity.üø

In a previous conflicts of interest scandal, Boo­ bis refused to leave ILSI in úøùú and as a conse­ quence could not be reappointed to an expert panel at EFSA. And Moretto had to resign from EFSA’s pesticides panel in úøùù after it was found he had omitted to declare his interests at ILSI.üù

However, there is no sign that the task force’s highly critical advice is being taken on board by the JMPR.

JMPR chair and co-chair in

In spite of this latter development, in February úøùÿ it emerged that Moretto is a member of a key European committee that is responsible for setting limits for workers’ exposure to car­ cinogenic substances, the Scientific Committee on Occupational Exposure Limits (SCOEL).üú, üû

conflict of interest scandal

Soon after the JMPR published its opinion that glyphosate is “unlikely to pose a carcino­ genic risk to humans from exposure through the diet”,úā it became embroiled in a bitter row about conflicts of interest. It emerged that the chairman of the JMPR for glyphosate, Alan Boo­ bis, was also the vice-president of ILSI Europe. In úøùú – the year Monsanto submitted the dos­ sier for the re-approval of glyphosate – the ILSI group received a $ýøø,øøø (£ûüü,úûü) donation from Monsanto and a $ýúĀ,ýøø donation from the industry group Croplife International, which represents Monsanto, Dow, Syngenta, and oth­ ers. The co-chair of the JMPR’s glyphosate ses­ sions was Professor Angelo Moretto, a board member of the ILSI Health and Environmental Sciences Institute (HESI), and of its Riskúù steer­ ing group, which Boobis also co-chairs.ûĀ

During the EFSA conflict of interest episode of úøùù, Moretto had failed to declare his owner­ ship of ùÿ% of a toxicology consulting firm he co-founded, Melete. He still had ùø% of these shares when he was nominated a member of the SCOEL in May úøùý, but the Commission did not find these conflicts of interest problem­ atic.üû In fact an investigation by the journalist Stéphane Horel for the French newspaper Le Monde found that the majority of the SCOEL’s experts (ùý out of úú) have links with industrial sectors directly involved with substances evalu­ ated by the committee.üû

Of the sixteen collaborations with industry that Moretto declared in the context of his SCOEL role, half consisted of expert witness opinions in the context of lawsuits. In other words, in­ dustries used the services of Moretto to defend themselves in court against their own employ­ ees, in cases that were often brought by people who were close to the victims when they died. Such cases were brought to claim compensa­ tion for diseases related to victims’ exposure to asbestos, benzene, and other chemicals.üû

Alan Boobis said: “My role in ILSI (and two of its branches) is as a public sector member and chair of their boards of trustees, positions which are not remunerated. The boards of trustees are responsible for oversight of the or­ ganisations and their scientific programmes.”ûĀ

But even if Boobis received no money for his ILSI work, it still represents a conflict of inter­ est since ILSI is an industry-funded organization that promotes industry-friendly methods of risk assessment.ûā

Questions over US EPA collusion with Monsanto over

glyphosate

This news sparked furious condemnation from green MEPs and NGOs, intensified by the re­ port’s release two days before an EU relicens­ ing vote on glyphosate, which was worth bil­ lions of dollars to industry.ûĀ As it happened, a qualified majority was not reached in the vote and the Commission intervened, granting its

In May úøùþ Monsanto gained support for its claims that glyphosate is non-carcinogenic when the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) briefly published a document from its Cancer Assessment Review Committee (CARC)

Political and commercial interference

stating that glyphosate was “not likely carcino­ genic” before removing it. The agency said that the document had been published in error pri­ or to finishing its review of the chemical.û

with science at US EPA

If the authenticity of Copley’s correspondence is verified, it will be just the latest episode in a long history of political and commercial inter­ ference in science at the EPA. In a survey car­ ried out by the Union of Concerned Scientists, hundreds of current and former EPA scientists reported political interference in their work, significant barriers to the free communication of scientific results, and concerns about the agency’s effectiveness. Out of ù,ýĀþ scientists who responded to the survey:

However, the leaked document had an effect: it was cited by Monsanto as evidence that the IARC classification of glyphosate as a probable carcinogen was flawed.üü

In February úøùÿ a new court filing made on behalf of dozens of people claiming that Mon­ santo’s glyphosate herbicide gave them cancer included information about alleged efforts within the US Environmental Protection Agen­ cy (EPA) to protect Monsanto’s interests and unfairly aid the agrichemical industry.üü

• ÿ% said they had frequently or occasion­ ally been “directed to inappropriately ex­ clude or alter technical information from an EPA scientific document”

The filing included what the attorneys rep­ resented to be correspondence from Marion Copley, a ûø-year career EPA scientist, accus­ ing top-ranking EPA official Jess Rowland of playing “your political conniving games with the science” to favour pesticide manufacturers such as Monsanto.üü

• ùþ% had personally experienced frequent or occasional “situations in which scientists have actively objected to, resigned from, or removed themselves from a project be­ cause of pressure to change scientific find­ ings”

Rowland oversaw the EPA’s cancer assessment for glyphosate and was a key author of a report finding glyphosate was not likely to be carcino­ genic. But in the correspondence, longtime EPA toxicologist Marion Copley cited evidence from animal studies and writes: “It is essentially cer­ tain that glyphosate causes cancer.” Copley ac­ cused Rowland of having “intimidated staff” to change reports to favour industry.üü

• ùĀ% had personally experienced frequent or occasional “changes or edits during re­ view that change the meaning of scientific findings.”

• úú% had personally experienced frequent or occasional “selective or incomplete use of data to justify a specific regulatory out­ come”

The plaintiffs, all of whom are suffering from non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) or have lost a loved one to NHL, asserted in court filings that Monsanto wielded significant influence within the EPA’s Office of Pesticide Programs (OPP) and had close ties specifically to Rowland, who until úøùþ was deputy division director within the health effects division of the OPP.üü

• üû% knew of “many or some” cases where EPA political appointees had inappropri­ ately involved themselves in scientific de­ cisions

• üú% knew of “many or some” cases where “commercial interests have inappropri­ ately induced the reversal or withdrawal of EPA scientific conclusions or decisions through political intervention.”üý

Rowland managed the work of scientists who assessed the health effects of exposures to pes­ ticides like glyphosate and he chaired the EPA’s Cancer Assessment Review Committee (CARC) that in úøùþ determined that glyphosate was not likely to be carcinogenic to humans. Row­ land left the EPA in the same year, shortly after the CARC report was leaked.üü

Such interference undermines the role of sci­ ence in regulatory decision-making.

IARC: Strict policy on

Solecki, who is currently head of the “Safety of Pesticides” department responsible for the health assessment of glyphosate in BfR and who has worked with industry representatives for years.

conflicts of interest

In contrast with organizations that have issued reassuring verdicts on glyphosate’s safety, IARC has a strict policy of excluding experts with conflicts of interest from its decision-making processes. It states, “Working Group Members are selected on the basis of (a) knowledge and experience and (b) absence of real or apparent conflicts of interests.”üþ

Some committee members served double roles in different committees, leading to a situ­ ation where they reviewed their own previous decisions on glyphosate. Also, some officials currently serving in the German authorities re­ sponsible for the current evaluation of glypho­ sate were also involved in the úøøú evaluation, resulting in a strong continuity of personnel who are central to the re-evaluation of glypho­ sate.

While it has been alleged that IARC’s glypho­ sate evaluation was marred by a conflict of in­ terest,üÿ the allegations are unconvincing and largely emanate from industry-linked sources.üĀ They will be dealt with more fully in a subse­ quent report in this series.

Such double roles of committee members con­ stitute a clear conflict of interest, as employees of these agencies are highly unlikely to contra­ dict and invalidate their own previous decision.

Conclusion

The current evaluation of glyphosate has been marked by a lack of transparency. Over Āø% of the national experts involved in EFSA’s assessment of glyphosate refused to have their names disclosed to the public, so any conflicts of interest are effectively being hidden.

Glyphosate’s previous and current evalua­ tions in Europe have been marred by conflicts of interest and a lack of transparency. As the “rapporteur” member state for glyphosate, the German authorities were responsible for assess­ ing the industry safety studies on the chemical and forwarding their report to the relevant EU authorities.

The overlapping of staff between different regulatory and expert bodies means that inde­ pendent scrutiny of the decisions of these bod­ ies is lacking. BfR has claimed support for its claim that glyphosate is not carcinogenic from an apparently separate expert body, the JMPR. Yet BfR representatives have been sitting for years in the JMPR – and have even written JMPR assessment reports on glyphosate. This places in question the independence of both bodies in their assessments of glyphosate.

The initial EU approval in úøøú was compro­ mised by conflicts of interest among people serving in the regulatory authorities of Germa­ ny, leading to institutional conflicts of interest on the part of these authorities.

One important type of conflict of interest is the closeness to industry of the various regu­ latory authorities involved in the glyphosate approval.

We conclude that the bad scientific practices of the regulatory and expert bodies as detailed in the previous chapter are strongly correlated with conflicts of interest.

One authority, the BBA, has collaborated with agrochemical companies on the development of commercial products and on applications for patents on products. Another authority, BVL, considers itself a “service provider” to indus­ try in pesticide applications. Strong conflicts of interest with industry are also found in in­ dividuals within the authorities, such as Roland

Conclusion and recommendations

of interest do not matter as long as the scien­ tific quality of the publications is sound, we found that the reviews suffer from serious sci­ entific shortcomings. For example, they utilize manipulations such as apparently calculated omissions, misrepresentation of facts, and the introduction of irrelevant data to confuse the picture and deny the scientific evidence of gly­ phosate’s harmful effects.

In 2009 a new regulation was passed in Eu­ rope that required industry to include studies from the peer-reviewed scientific literature in the dossiers submitted in support of pesticide approvals.

These authors claim to have used a “weight of evidence” approach to assess whether glypho­ sate is carcinogenic or not. However, in reality they avoid a true weight of evidence approach, which would take a holistic view on the differ­ ent lines of evidence. These different lines of evidence are:

Taken together with studies from industry, many of these studies link glyphosate and its commercial formulations with harmful effects, including carcinogenicity and genotoxicity. As the new pesticide regulation includes hazard cut-off criteria for carcinogenic and genotoxic pesticides, a proper evaluation of the science would necessarily lead to glyphosate being banned in Europe.

• The results of animal studies

• The outcome of epidemiological data

The onslaught of scientific articles showing problems with glyphosate reached a peak in 2015 with the publication of a report by IARC, the World Health Organization’s cancer agen­ cy, classifying glyphosate as a probable carcin­ ogen and pointing to evidence that it is geno­ toxic.

• Considerations of possible mechanisms of carcinogenesis.

In the case of glyphosate, the different lines of evidence complement each other. For instance, the finding of a significantly increased inci­ dence of malignant lymphoma in three mouse studies is complementary to the association be­ tween glyphosate exposure and non-Hodgkin lymphoma in humans.

Monsanto and other companies have coun­ tered such developments by financing and sup­ porting the publication of scientific reviews in peer-reviewed journals. These include what we call the “Intertek papers”, which were spon­ sored by Monsanto via the industry consultan­ cy Intertek and were published in 2016. These reviews reach the reassuring conclusions that glyphosate and its commercial formulations are non-carcinogenic and do not pose other serious health risks.

Altogether evidence exists in all three areas of consideration. A holistic consideration of this evidence inevitably leads to the conclusion that glyphosate is carcinogenic. Instead, the Mon­ santo-sponsored authors considered the differ­ ent lines of evidence separately, used false ar­ guments, and concealed or distorted the facts, while claiming to strengthen their arguments.

Many of the authors of these reviews had con­ flicts of interest with industry or industry-linked bodies. Some have strong links to the Interna­ tional Life Sciences Institute (ILSI), an organiza­ tion funded by industry, including companies that manufacture and/or market glyphosate herbicides, such as Monsanto, Dow, and BASF. ILSI specializes in developing and promoting industry-friendly concepts and methods of test­ ing and risk assessment.

Monsanto and other pesticide companies gained support for their contention that gly­ phosate does not cause cancer from several regulatory agencies and expert bodies, includ­ ing BfR (Germany’s Federal Institute for Risk As­ sessment), the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), the Joint Food and Agriculture Organi­ zation/World Health Organization (FAO/WHO) Meeting on Pesticide Residues (JMPR), and the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), which in May 2016 published a document on its website stating that glyphosate was “not likely

While some might argue that such conflicts

carcinogenic” before removing it, saying it had been published in error prior to the agency’s completing its assessment.

However, reports on glyphosate issued by these bodies are marred by serious conflicts of interest, dating back to the time of the chemi­ cal’s first European approval and before. These conflicts of interest have been accompanied by bad scientific practices in these bodies’ reports claiming that glyphosate is safe. For example, BfR admitted statistically significant increas­ es in tumours in glyphosate-treated animals in five mouse and two rat studies – but then claimed that only a “sole” study had shown such increases. Also, BfR separated out the vari­ ous lines of evidence of glyphosate’s carcinoge­ nicity in order to deny them individually, rather than evaluating the evidence as a whole. When the whole picture is considered, evidence of glyphosate’s carcinogenicity becomes clear.

In sum, attempts by agencies and individu­ als to defend glyphosate and its formulations against evidence that they cause cancer and damage DNA are scientifically unsound and un­ dermined by serious conflicts of interest.

In the light of our findings, we recommend that the evaluations of glyphosate and its for­ mulations by individuals and institutions com­ promised by conflicts of interest are set aside. If these institutions and individuals wish to ad­ dress their flawed evaluations, they must open­ ly address the scientific points and evidence raised in this report. For the sake of transpar­ ency, they should use only studies available in the public domain. In the meantime, glypho­ sate-based formulations should be phased out as a precautionary measure.

References

9. International Agency for Research on Can­

cer. IARC Monographs Volume 112: Evalua­ tion of Five Organophosphate Insecticides and Herbicides. Lyon, France: World Health Organization; 2015. http://monographs.iarc. fr/ENG/Monographs/vol112/.

Introduction

1. Benbrook C. Impacts of genetically en­

gineered crops on pesticide use in the US – The first sixteen years. Environ Sci Eur. 2012;24(24). doi:10.1186/2190-4715-24-24.

10. Environmental Working Group. EWG calls

on Monsanto to retract remarks on WHO weed-killer report. EWG. http://www.ewg. org/release/ewg-calls-monsanto-retract-re­ marks-who-weed-killer-report. Published April 3, 2015. Accessed January 31, 2017.

2. James C. Global Status of Commercialized

Biotech/GM Crops: 2014. Ithaca, NY: ISAAA;

2014. http://www.isaaa.org/resources/publi­ cations/briefs/49/default.asp.

11. RMS Germany. Renewal Assessment Re­

port Glyphosate. Addendum 1 to RAR, As­ sessment of IARC Monographs Volume 112 (2015): Glyphosate, 31 August 2015. Berlin, Germany; 2015. http://gmwatch.org/files/ Renewal_Assessment_Report_Glyphosate_ Addendum1_RAR.pdf.

3. Majewski MS, Coupe, R. H., Foreman WT,

Capel PD. Pesticides in Mississippi air and rain: A comparison between 1995 and

2007. Env Toxicol Chem. February 2014. doi:10.1002/etc.2550.

4. Coupe RH, Kalkhoff SJ, Capel PD, Gregoire

12. European Food Safety Authority (EFSA).

C. Fate and transport of glyphosate and aminomethylphosphonic acid in surface waters of agricultural basins. Pest Manag Sci. 2011;68:16–30. doi:10.1002/ps.2212.

Conclusion on the peer review of the pes­ ticide risk assessment of the active sub­ stance glyphosate. EFSA J. 2015;13(11):4302. doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2015.4302.

5. Aris A, Leblanc S. Maternal and fetal ex­

13. JMPR. Pesticide Residues in Food 2016. Spe­

posure to pesticides associated to genet­ ically modified foods in Eastern Town­ ships of Quebec, Canada. Reprod Toxicol. 2011;31(4):528–533.

cial Session of the Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues. FAO Plant Produc­ tion and Protection Paper 227. Rome, Italy: World Health Organization, Food and Agri­ culture Organization of the United Nations;

2016. http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5693e.pdf.

6. Niemann L, Sieke C, Pfeil R, Solecki R. A crit­

ical review of glyphosate findings in human urine samples and comparison with the ex­ posure of operators and consumers. J Für Verbraucherschutz Leb. January 2015:1-10. doi:10.1007/s00003-014-0927-3.

Chapter 1

1. United Nations General Assembly Human

Rights Council. Report of the Special Rap­ porteur on the Right to Food. Geneva, Swit­ zerland: United Nations; 2017. http://www. srtoxics.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/ Pesticides-and-right-to-food.pdf.

7. OpenPR. Glyphosate market worth US$ 10.0

billion by 2021. openpr.com. http://www. openpr.com/news/400938/Glyphosate-Mar­ ket-Worth-US-10-0-Billion-by-2021.html. Published December 27, 2016. Accessed De­ cember 30, 2016.

2. European Parliament and Council. Regula­

tion (EC) No 1107/2009 of 21 October 2009 concerning the placing of plant protec­ tion products on the market and repealing Council Directives 79/117/EEC and 91/414/ EEC. Off J Eur Union. October 2009:1–50.

8. Chatsko M. How much money does Monsan­

to make from Roundup? The Motley Fool. http://www.fool.com/investing/2016/05/26/ how-much-money-does-monsanto-makefrom-roundup.aspx. Published May 26,

2016. Accessed January 3, 2017.

3. Myers JP, Antoniou MN, Blumberg B, et al.

Concerns over use of glyphosate-based her­

bicides and risks associated with exposures: a consensus statement. Environ Health. 2016;15(19). doi:10.1186/s12940-016-0117-0.

12. Lexchin J. Those who have the gold make

the evidence: How the pharmaceutical in­ dustry biases the outcomes of clinical tri­ als of medications. Sci Eng Ethics. February

2011. doi:10.1007/s11948-011-9265-3.

4. European Parliament and Council. Regula­

tion (EC) no. 1272/2008 of the European Par­ liament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on classification, labelling and pack­ aging of substances and mixtures, amend­ ing and repealing Directives 67/548/EEC and 1999/45/EC, and amending Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006. Off J Eur Union. December 2008.

13. Huss A, Egger M, Hug K, Huweiler-Mün­

tener K, Röösli M. Source of funding and results of studies of health effects of mo­ bile phone use: Systematic review of exper­ imental studies. Environ Health Perspect. 2007;115:1–4.

14. Diels J, Cunha M, Manaia C, Sabugosa-Ma­

5. RMS Germany. Renewal Assessment Report.

deira B, Silva M. Association of financial or professional conflict of interest to research outcomes on health risks or nutritional as­ sessment studies of genetically modified products. Food Policy. 2011;36:197–203.

18 December 2013, Revised 29 January 2015, 31 March 2015. Glyphosate Volume 3: Annex B.6.1: Toxicology and Metabolism. Berlin, Germany: BfR; 2015. http://www.gmwatch. org/files/Renewal_Assessment_Report_Gly­ phosate_genotox_and_cancer.pdf.

15. Guillemaud T, Lombaert E, Bourguet D.

Conflicts of interest in GM Bt crop effi­ cacy and durability studies. PLOS ONE. 2016;11(12):e0167777. doi:10.1371/journal. pone.0167777.

6. Monsanto Europe S.A. on behalf of the Gly­

phosate Task Force. Glyphosate and Salts of Glyphosate: Annex II, Document B. An­ twerp, Belgium: Glyphosate Task Force;

2012. http://gmwatch.org/files/Glyphosate_ and_Salts_of_Glyphosate_dossier.pdf.

16. Pesticide Action Network Europe and

Générations Futures. Missed and Dismissed. Brussels, Belgium: Pesticide Action Net­ work Europe; 2014. http://www.pan-eu­ rope.info/old/Resources/Reports/PANE%20 -%202014%20-%20Missed%20and%20dis­ missed.pdf.

7. Internet Archive Wayback Machine. http://

www.glyphosate.eu. Published October 25, 2012.

8. Glyphosate Task Force. Glyphosate safety

profile for human health. Glyphosate Facts. http://www.glyphosate.eu/glyphosate-safe�­ ty-profile-human-health. Published Octo­ ber 25, 2012. Accessed January 26, 2017.

17. International Agency for Research on Can­

cer. IARC Monographs Volume 112: Evalua­ tion of Five Organophosphate Insecticides and Herbicides. Lyon, France: World Health Organization; 2015. http://monographs.iarc. fr/ENG/Monographs/vol112/.

9. Barnes DE, Bero LA. Why review articles on

the health effects of passive smoking reach different conclusions. JAMA. 1998;279:1566-1570.

18. World Health Organization Internation­

al Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans: Preamble. Lyon, Fance: World Health Organization International Agency for Research on Can­ cer (IARC); 2006. http://monographs.iarc.fr/ ENG/Preamble/.

10. Michaels D. Doubt Is Their Product: How In­

dustry’s Assault on Science Threatens Your Health. Oxford University Press; 2008.

11. Lexchin J, Bero LA, Djulbegovic B, Clark O.

Pharmaceutical industry sponsorship and research outcome and quality: systematic review. Br Med J. 2003;326:1167. doi:10.1136/ bmj.326.7400.1167.

19. Portier CJ, Armstrong BK, Baguley BC, et al.

Differences in the carcinogenic evaluation of glyphosate between the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) and

the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). J Epidemiol Community Health. 2016;70(8). doi:10.1136/jech-2015-207005.

by impairing retinoic acid signaling. Chem Res Toxicol. 2010;23:1586–1595. doi:10.1021/ tx1001749.

20. Environmental Working Group. EWG calls

28. Antoniou M, Habib MEM, Leifert C, et al.

on Monsanto to retract remarks on WHO weed-killer report. EWG. http://www.ewg. org/release/ewg-calls-monsanto-retract-re­ marks-who-weed-killer-report. Published April 3, 2015. Accessed January 31, 2017.

Teratogenic effects of glyphosate-based herbicides: Divergence of regulatory deci­ sions from scientific evidence. J Env Anal Toxicol. 2012;S4:006. doi:10.4172/2161-0525. S4-006.

21. Monsanto. Monsanto reinforces decades of

29. Lopez SL, Aiassa D, Benitez-Leite S, et al.

data and regulatory review clearly docu­ ment safety of glyphosate. monsanto.com. http://news.monsanto.com/press-release/ research-and-development/monsanto-re­ inforces-decades-data-and-regulatory-re­ view-clearl. Published March 23, 2015. Ac­ cessed January 31, 2017.

Pesticides used in South American GMObased agriculture: A review of their effects on humans and animal models. In: Fishbein JC, Heilman JM, eds. Advances in Molecu­ lar Toxicology. Vol 6. New York: Elsevier; 2012:41–75.

30. Kier LD, Kirkland DJ. Review of genotox­

22. US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

icity studies of glyphosate and glypho­ sate-based formulations. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2013;43(4):283-315. doi:10.3109/10408444.20 13.770820.

Memo: Second Peer Review of Glyphosate. Washington, DC: US Environmental Pro­ tection Agency (EPA); 1991. https://www3. epa.gov/pesticides/chem_search/cleared_re­ views/csr_PC-103601_30-Oct-91_265.pdf.

31. US Right to Know. MDL Monsanto glypho­

sate cancer case key documents and anal­ ysis. documents unsealed in Case 3:16-md-02741-VC document 187-1 filed 03/14/17. March 2017. https://usrtk.org/wp-content/ uploads/2017/03/187series.pdf.

23. Monsanto. 2015 Glyphosate Expert Panel.

monsanto.com. http://www.monsanto.com/ iarc-roundup/pages/2015-glyphosate-ex­ pert-panel.aspx. Published 2015. Accessed December 26, 2016.

32. Williams GM, Aardema M, Acquavella J, et

24. Williams GM, Kroes R, Munro IC. Safety eval­

al. A review of the carcinogenic potential of glyphosate by four independent expert panels and comparison to the IARC assess­ ment. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2016;46(sup1):3-20. doi:10.1080/10408444.2016.1214677.

uation and risk assessment of the herbicide Roundup and its active ingredient, glypho­ sate, for humans. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2000;31:117-165. doi:10.1006/rtph.1999.1371.

25. Williams AL, Watson RE, DeSesso JM. De­

33. RMS Germany. Final Addendum to the Re­

velopmental and reproductive outcomes in humans and animals after glyphosate ex­ posure: A critical analysis. J Toxicol Environ Health Part B. 2012;15:39–96.

newal Assessment Report - Public Version

- Risk Assessment Provided by the Rappor­ teur Member State Germany and Co-Rap­ porteur Member State Slovakia for the Ac­ tive Substance GLYPHOSATE according to the Procedure for the Renewal of the Inclu­ sion of a Second Group of Active Substanc­ es in Annex I to Council Directive 91/414/EEC Laid down in Commission Regulation (EU) No. 1141/2010. Volume 1. Berlin, Germany;

2015. http://gmwatch.org/files/Final_adden­ dum_to_the_Renewal_Assessment_Report. pdf.

26. Dallegrave E, Mantese FD, Coelho RS, Perei­

ra JD, Dalsenter PR, Langeloh A. The tera­ togenic potential of the herbicide glypho­ sate-Roundup in Wistar rats. Toxicol Lett. 2003;142:45-52.

27. Paganelli A, Gnazzo V, Acosta H, López SL,

Carrasco AE. Glyphosate-based herbicides produce teratogenic effects on vertebrates

34. EPA’s Office of Pesticide Programs. Glypho­

41. Solomon KR. Glyphosate in the general

sate Issue Paper: Evaluation of Carcinogenic Potential. Washington, DC: US Environmen­ tal Protection Agency (EPA); 2016. http://bit. ly/2mKaseA.

population and in applicators: a critical re­ view of studies on exposures. Crit Rev Tox­ icol. 2016;46(sup1):21-27. doi:10.1080/104084 44.2016.1214678.

35. US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

42. McClellan RO. Evaluating the potential car­

Transmission of Meeting Minutes and Final Report of the December 13–16, 2016 FIFRA SAP Meeting Held to Consider and Review Scientific Issues Associated with EPA’s Eval­ uation of the Carcinogenic Potential of Gly­ phosate. Washington, DC: US Environmen­ tal Protection Agency; 2017. https://www. epa.gov/sites/production/files/2017-03/ documents/december_13-16_2016_final_re­ port_03162017.pdf.

cinogenic hazard of glyphosate. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2016;46(sup1):1-2. doi:10.1080/10408 444.2016.1234117.

Chapter 2

1. Greim H, Saltmiras D, Mostert V, Strupp C.

Evaluation of carcinogenic potential of the herbicide glyphosate, drawing on tumor incidence data from fourteen chronic/car­ cinogenicity rodent studies. Crit Rev Toxi­ col. February 2015:1-24. doi:10.3109/1040844 4.2014.1003423.

36. Greim H, Saltmiras D, Mostert V, Strupp C.

Evaluation of carcinogenic potential of the herbicide glyphosate, drawing on tumor incidence data from fourteen chronic/car­ cinogenicity rodent studies. Crit Rev Toxi­ col. February 2015:1-24. doi:10.3109/1040844 4.2014.1003423.

2. RMS Germany. Renewal Assessment Re­

port Glyphosate. Addendum 1 to RAR, As­ sessment of IARC Monographs Volume 112 (2015): Glyphosate, 31 August 2015. Berlin, Germany; 2015. http://gmwatch.org/files/ Renewal_Assessment_Report_Glyphosate_ Addendum1_RAR.pdf.

37. Guyton K, Loomis D, Grosse Y, El Ghissassi

F, Benbrahim-Tallaa L. Carcinogenicity of tetrachlorvinphos, parathion, malathion, diazinon, and glyphosate. Lancet Oncol. 2015;16(5):490–491.

3. Williams GM, Berry C, Burns M, de Camargo

JLV, Greim H. Glyphosate rodent carcinoge­ nicity bioassay expert panel review. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2016;46(sup1):44-55. doi:10.1080/10 408444.2016.1214679.

38. Brusick D, Aardema M, Kier L, Kirkland

D, Williams G. Genotoxicity Expert Pan­ el review: weight of evidence evaluation of the genotoxicity of glyphosate, gly­ phosate-based formulations, and amino­ methylphosphonic acid. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2016;46(sup1):56-74. doi:10.1080/10408444.2 016.1214680.

4. Monsanto. 2015 Glyphosate Expert Panel.

monsanto.com. http://www.monsanto.com/ iarc-roundup/pages/2015-glyphosate-ex­ pert-panel.aspx. Published 2015. Accessed December 26, 2016.

39. Williams GM, Berry C, Burns M, de Camargo

JLV, Greim H. Glyphosate rodent carcinoge­ nicity bioassay expert panel review. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2016;46(sup1):44-55. doi:10.1080/10 408444.2016.1214679.

5. World Health Organization Internation­

al Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans: Preamble. Lyon, Fance: World Health Organization International Agency for Research on Can­ cer (IARC); 2006. http://monographs.iarc.fr/ ENG/Preamble/.

40. Acquavella J, Garabrant D, Marsh G, Sora­

han T, Weed DL. Glyphosate epidemiology expert panel review: a weight of evidence systematic review of the relationship be­ tween glyphosate exposure and non-Hod­ gkin’s lymphoma or multiple myeloma. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2016;46(sup1):28-43. doi:10.108 0/10408444.2016.1214681.

6. International Agency for Research on Can­

cer. IARC Monographs Volume 112: Evalua­ tion of Five Organophosphate Insecticides and Herbicides. Lyon, France: World Health

Organization; 2015. http://monographs.iarc. fr/ENG/Monographs/vol112/.

archive.epa.gov/pesticides/chemicalsearch/ chemical/foia/web/pdf/103601/103601-210. pdf.

7. US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Memo: Consensus Review of Gly­ phosate. Caswell No. 661A. Washington, DC; 1985. https://archive.epa.gov/pesti­ cides/chemicalsearch/chemical/foia/web/ pdf/103601/103601-171.pdf.

14. US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

Memo: Glyphosate – EPA Registration No. 524–308 – Roundup – PP#8F3673 – Glypho­ sate In/On Corn – Tolerance Request And “free Standing Summary.” US Environmen­ tal Protection Agency (EPA); 1988. https:// archive.epa.gov/pesticides/chemicalsearch/ chemical/foia/web/pdf/103601/103601-238. pdf.

8. US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

Evaluating pesticides for carcinogenic po­ tential. https://www.epa.gov/pesticide-sci­ ence-and-assessing-pesticide-risks/evalu­ ating-pesticides-carcinogenic-potential. Published Msrch 2016. Accessed February 20, 2017.

15. US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

Memo: Second Peer Review of Glyphosate. Washington, DC: US Environmental Pro­ tection Agency (EPA); 1991. https://www3. epa.gov/pesticides/chem_search/cleared_re­ views/csr_PC-103601_30-Oct-91_265.pdf.

9. US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Memo: EPA Reg. # 524–308; Round­ up; Glyphosate; Pathology Report on Ad­ ditional Kidney Sections. Washington, DC: US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA); 1985. https://archive.epa.gov/pesti­ cides/chemicalsearch/chemical/foia/web/ pdf/103601/103601-207.pdf.

16. BAuA (German Federal Institute for Occu­

pational Safety and Health). Proposal for Harmonised Classification and Labelling. Based on Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 (CLP Regulation), Annex VI, Part 2. Substance Name: N-(Phosphonomethyl)glycine; Gly­ phosate (ISO). Dortmund, Germany: Euro­ pean Chemicals Agency (ECHA); 2016. http:// echa.europa.eu/documents/10162/13626/ clh_report_glyphosate_en.pdf.

10. Prabook. Marvin Kuschner. prabook.com.

http://prabook.com/web/person-view.htm­ l?profileId=625517. Published 2017.

11. US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

Memo: Glyphosate: EPA Registration No. 524-308: Roundup: Additional Histopatho­ logical Evaluations of Kidneys in the Chron­ ic Feeding Study of Glyphosate in Mice. Washington, DC: US Environmental Pro­ tection Agency (EPA); 1986. https://archive. epa.gov/pesticides/chemicalsearch/chemi­ cal/foia/web/pdf/103601/103601-211.pdf.

17. Organisation for Economic Cooperation

and Development (OECD). Guidance Doc­ ument 116 on the Conduct and Design of Chronic Toxicity and Carcinogenicity Stud­ ies, Supporting Test Guidelines 451, 452 and 453: 2nd Edition: Environment Directorate Joint Meeting of the Chemicals Committee and the Working Party on Chemicals, Pesti­ cides and Biotechnology.; 2012.

12. US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

Memo: Transmittal of the Final FIFRA Sci­ entific Advisory Panel Reports on the Feb­ ruary 11–12, 1986 Meeting. Washington, DC: US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA); 1986. https://archive.epa.gov/pesti­ cides/chemicalsearch/chemical/foia/web/ pdf/103601/103601-209.pdf.

18. Acquavella J, Garabrant D, Marsh G, Sora­

han T, Weed DL. Glyphosate epidemiology expert panel review: a weight of evidence systematic review of the relationship be­ tween glyphosate exposure and non-Hod­ gkin’s lymphoma or multiple myeloma. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2016;46(sup1):28-43. doi:10.108 0/10408444.2016.1214681.

13. US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

Memo: Glyphosate Registration Standard Revision. Washington, DC: US Environmen­ tal Protection Agency (EPA); 1986. https://

19. De Roos AJ, Blair A, Rusiecki JA, et al. Cancer

incidence among glyphosate-exposed pesti­ cide applicators in the Agricultural Health

Study. Env Health Perspect. 2005;113:49-54.

27. Clausing P. Krebsgefahr durch Glyphosat:

Der „Weight of Evidence Approach“ des BfR. Umw Hyg Arbeitsmedizin. 2017;22(1):27-34.

20. Infante PF. Glyphosate and Cancer: A Re­

view of the Epidemiological Literature Re­ lated to the Development of Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma. Presented before the FIFRA, US Environmental Protection Agency Scientif­ ic Advisory Panel Regarding EPA’s Evalu­ ation of the Carcinogenic Potential of Gly­ phosate. Arlington, Virginia; 2016. http:// gmwatch.org/files/Infante_Glyphosate_pa­ per_010617_Tables.pdf.

28. Williams GM, Aardema M, Acquavella J, et

al. A review of the carcinogenic potential of glyphosate by four independent expert panels and comparison to the IARC assess­ ment. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2016;46(sup1):3-20. doi:10.1080/10408444.2016.1214677.

29. Pesticide Action Network Germany. Com­

21. Portier CJ, Armstrong BK, Baguley BC, et al.

ments on ECHA’s CLH-Report Regarding Carcinogenicity. Hamburg, Germany; 2016. http://www.pan-germany.org/download/ PAN_Germany_Comment_on_CLH-Report_ regarding_Carcinogenicity_1607.pdf.

Differences in the carcinogenic evaluation of glyphosate between the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) and the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). J Epidemiol Community Health. 2016;70(8). doi:10.1136/jech-2015-207005.

30. Williams AL, Watson RE, DeSesso JM. De­

velopmental and reproductive outcomes in humans and animals after glyphosate ex­ posure: A critical analysis. J Toxicol Environ Health Part B. 2012;15:39–96.

22. Eriksson M, Hardell L, Carlberg M, Aker­

man M. Pesticide exposure as risk factor for non-Hodgkin lymphoma including histo­ pathological subgroup analysis. Int J Cancer. 2008;123:1657-1663. doi:10.1002/ijc.23589.

31. Beuret CJ, Zirulnik F, Giménez MS. Effect of

the herbicide glyphosate on liver lipoperox­ idation in pregnant rats and their fetuses. Reprod Toxicol Elmsford N. 2005;19(4):501-504. doi:10.1016/j.reprotox.2004.09.009.

23. McDuffie HH, Pahwa P, McLaughlin JR, et

al. Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and specific pesticide exposures in men: cross-Canada study of pesticides and health. Cancer Ep­ idemiol Biomark Prev Publ Am Assoc Can­ cer Res Cosponsored Am Soc Prev Oncol. 2001;10(11):1155-1163.

32. Kim JD, McCarter RJ, Yu BP. Influence of

age, exercise, and dietary restriction on oxidative stress in rats. Aging Milan Italy. 1996;8(2):123-129.

24. De Roos AJ, Zahm S, Cantor K, et al. Inte­

grative assessment of multiple pesticides as risk factors for non-Hodgkin’s lym­ phoma among men. Occup Environ Med. 2003;60(9):e11. doi:10.1136/oem.60.9.e11.

33. Rao G, Xia E, Nadakavukaren MJ, Richard­

son A. Effect of dietary restriction on the age-dependent changes in the expression of antioxidant enzymes in rat liver. J Nutr. 1990;120(6):602-609.

25. Chang ET, Delzell E. Systematic review and

meta-analysis of glyphosate exposure and risk of lymphohematopoietic cancers. J En­ viron Sci Health B. 2016;51(6):402-434. doi:1 0.1080/03601234.2016.1142748.

34. Xia E, Rao G, Remmen HV, Heydari AR,

Richardson A. Activities of antioxidant en­ zymes in various tissues of male Fischer 344 rats are altered by food restriction. J Nutr. 1995;125(2):195-201.

26. RMS Germany. Renewal Assessment Report.

18 December 2013, Revised 29 January 2015, 31 March 2015. Glyphosate Volume 3: Annex B.6.1: Toxicology and Metabolism. Berlin, Germany: BfR; 2015. http://www.gmwatch. org/files/Renewal_Assessment_Report_Gly­ phosate_genotox_and_cancer.pdf.

35. Festing MFW. Genetically defined strains

in drug development and toxicity testing. Methods Mol Biol Clifton NJ. 2016;1438:1-17. doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-3661-8_1.

36. European Chemicals Agency (ECHA). Guid­

ance on the Application of the CLP Criteria:

Guidance to Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 on Classification, Labelling and Packaging (CLP) of Substances and Mixtures. Version 4.1. Helsinki, Finland: European Chemicals Agency (ECHA); 2015.

December 26, 2016.

2. JMPR. Pesticide Residues in Food 2016. Spe­

cial Session of the Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues. FAO Plant Produc­ tion and Protection Paper 227. Rome, Italy: World Health Organization, Food and Agri­ culture Organization of the United Nations;

2016. http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5693e.pdf.

37. Brusick D, Aardema M, Kier L, Kirkland

D, Williams G. Genotoxicity Expert Pan­ el review: weight of evidence evaluation of the genotoxicity of glyphosate, gly­ phosate-based formulations, and amino­ methylphosphonic acid. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2016;46(sup1):56-74. doi:10.1080/10408444.2 016.1214680.

3. BUND (Friends of the Earth Germany). Note

„Mangelhaft“: Das EU-Zulassungsverfahren Für Glyphosat. Warum Glyphosat Vom Markt Genommen Und Das Zulassungsver­ fahren Für Pestizide Komplett Reformiert Werden Muss. Berlin, Germany: Bund für Umwelt und Naturschutz Deutschland e.V.; 2015.

38. Klaunig JE, Kamendulis LM, Hocevar BA. Ox­

idative stress and oxidative damage in car­ cinogenesis. Toxicol Pathol. 2010;38(1):96-109. doi:10.1177/0192623309356453.

4. Williams GM, Berry C, Burns M, de Camargo

39. Kakehashi A, Wei M, Fukushima S, Wan­

JLV, Greim H. Glyphosate rodent carcinoge­ nicity bioassay expert panel review. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2016;46(sup1):44-55. doi:10.1080/10 408444.2016.1214679.

ibuchi H. Oxidative stress in the carcino­ genicity of chemical carcinogens. Can­ cers. 2013;5(4):1332-1354. doi:10.3390/ cancers5041332.

5. Brusick D, Aardema M, Kier L, Kirkland

40. Deferme L, Wolters J, Claessen S, Briedé J,

D, Williams G. Genotoxicity Expert Pan­ el review: weight of evidence evaluation of the genotoxicity of glyphosate, gly­ phosate-based formulations, and amino­ methylphosphonic acid. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2016;46(sup1):56-74. doi:10.1080/10408444.2 016.1214680.

Kleinjans J. Oxidative stress mechanisms do not discriminate between genotoxic and nongenotoxic liver carcinogens. Chem Res Toxicol. 2015;28(8):1636-1646. doi:10.1021/ acs.chemrestox.5b00222.

41. Cacciapuoti F. Oxidative stress as “moth­

er” of many human diseases at strong clinical impact. J Cardiovasc Med Cardiol. 2016;3(1):1–6.

6. Williams GM, Aardema M, Acquavella J, et

al. A review of the carcinogenic potential of glyphosate by four independent expert panels and comparison to the IARC assess­ ment. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2016;46(sup1):3-20. doi:10.1080/10408444.2016.1214677.

42. European Parliament and Council. Regula­

tion (EC) no. 1272/2008 of the European Par­ liament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on classification, labelling and pack­ aging of substances and mixtures, amend­ ing and repealing Directives 67/548/EEC and 1999/45/EC, and amending Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006. Off J Eur Union. December 2008.

7. Acquavella J, Garabrant D, Marsh G, Sora­

han T, Weed DL. Glyphosate epidemiology expert panel review: a weight of evidence systematic review of the relationship be­ tween glyphosate exposure and non-Hod­ gkin’s lymphoma or multiple myeloma. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2016;46(sup1):28-43. doi:10.108 0/10408444.2016.1214681.

Chapter 3

8. Solomon KR. Glyphosate in the general

1. Monsanto. 2015 Glyphosate Expert Panel.

population and in applicators: a critical re­ view of studies on exposures. Crit Rev Tox­ icol. 2016;46(sup1):21-27. doi:10.1080/104084 44.2016.1214678.

monsanto.com. http://www.monsanto.com/ iarc-roundup/pages/2015-glyphosate-ex­ pert-panel.aspx. Published 2015. Accessed

9. International Agency for Research on Can­

Evaluation of carcinogenic potential of the herbicide glyphosate, drawing on tumor incidence data from fourteen chronic/car­ cinogenicity rodent studies. Crit Rev Toxi­ col. February 2015:1-24. doi:10.3109/1040844 4.2014.1003423.

cer. IARC Monographs Volume 112: Evalua­ tion of Five Organophosphate Insecticides and Herbicides. Lyon, France: World Health Organization; 2015. http://monographs.iarc. fr/ENG/Monographs/vol112/.

10. International Life Sciences Institute (ILSI).

17. Williams GM, Kroes R, Munro IC. Safety eval­

ILSI - ILSI Europe Membership. ilsi.org. Pub­ lished March 1, 2016. Accessed December 26, 2016.

uation and risk assessment of the herbicide Roundup and its active ingredient, glypho­ sate, for humans. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2000;31:117-165. doi:10.1006/rtph.1999.1371.

11. Corporate Europe Observatory. The In­

ternational Life Sciences Institute (ILSI), a Corporate Lobby Group. Brussels, Belgium: Corporate Europe Observatory; 2012. http:// corporateeurope.org/sites/default/files/il­ si-article-final.pdf.

18. Dingell RJD (D-M. Letter to Jack N. Gerard,

president and CEO, American Chemistry Council. April 2008.

19. Environmental Working Group. Congress to

chemical industry: You’re under investiga­ tion. Environmental Working Group. http:// web.archive.org/web/20121024123608/ h t t p : / / w w w . e w g . o r g / r e l e a s e / c o n ­ gress-chemical-industry-you-re-under-in­ vestigation. Published April 2, 2008. Ac­ cessed December 27, 2016.

12. European Food Safety Authority (EFSA).

Letter Re: Characterisation of ILSI and branches thereof. May 2012. https://www. efsa.europa.eu/en/press/news/120516a.

13. Corporate Europe Observatory. Unhap­

py Meal: The European Food Safety Au­ thority’s Independence Problem. Brussels, Belgium: Corporate Europe Observatory; 2013. http://corporateeurope.org/sites/de­ fault/files/attachments/unhappy_meal_re­ port_23_10_2013.pdf. Accessed October 28, 2013.

20. Zou JJ. Brokers of junk science? Center for

Public Integrity. https://www.publicinteg­ rity.org/2016/02/18/19307/brokers-junk-sci­ ence. Published February 18, 2016. Accessed December 26, 2016.

21. BioReliance. About us. bioreliance.com.

14. Laws F. Expert panels say IARC glyphosate

http://www.bioreliance.com/us/about-us. Published 2016. Accessed December 28, 2016.

report flawed, excludes key data. Delta Farm Press. http://www.deltafarmpress. com/regulatory/expert-panels-say-iarc-gly­ phosate-report-flawed-excludes-key-data. Published September 29, 2016. Accessed De­ cember 27, 2016.

22. International Agency for Research on Can­

cer. Glyphosate. IARC Monographs – 112. Lyon, France; 2015. http://monographs.iarc. fr/ENG/Monographs/vol112/mono112-09.pdf.

15. Arbeitsgemeinschaft der Wissenschaftli­

chen Medizinischen Fachgesellschaften e.V. [Association of the Scientific Medical Societies in Germany]. Empfehlungen Der AWMF Zum Umgang Mit Interessenkonflik­ ten Bei Fachgesellschaften. Düsseldorf and Berlin, Germany: Arbeitsgemeinschaft der Wissenschaftlichen Medizinischen Fachge­ sellschaften e.V. [Association of the Scien­ tific Medical Societies in Germany]; 2010. http://www.awmf.org/fileadmin/user_up­ load/Leitlinien/Werkzeuge/empf-coi.pdf.

23. Ruskin G. Why you can’t trust the American

Council on Science and Health. U.S. Right to Know. https://usrtk.org/hall-of-shame/whyyou-cant-trust-the-american-council-on-sci­ ence-and-health/. Published April 17, 2015. Accessed December 28, 2016.

24. SourceWatch. American Council on Science

and Health. sourcewatch.org. http://www. sourcewatch.org/index.php/American_ Council_on_Science_and_Health. Published

2016. Accessed December 28, 2016.

16. Greim H, Saltmiras D, Mostert V, Strupp C.

25. Mother Jones. American Council on Science

LabCorp. biotechprofiles.com. http://www. biotechprofiles.com/companyprofile/Co­ vanceLabs.aspx. Published 2016. Accessed January 4, 2017.

and Health financial summary. mother­ jones.com. http://www.motherjones.com/ documents/809483-acsh-financial-summa­ ry. Published 2016. Accessed December 28, 2016.

35. Covance. Contract Research Organization

(CRO) and drug development services at Co­ vance. covance.com. http://www.covance. com/. Published 2017. Accessed January 4, 2017.

26. SourceWatch. Scientific Alliance. source­

watch.org. http://www.sourcewatch.org/ index.php/Scientific_Alliance. Accessed De­ cember 28, 2016.

36. Pippin JJ MD, FACC. Covance gets an “F” in

27. Powerbase. Scientific Alliance. powerbase.

social-responsibility test. The Chandler Re­ public. http://www.pcrm.org/ Published Au­ gust 26, 2006.

info. http://powerbase.info/index.php/Sci­ entific_Alliance. Published 2015. Accessed December 28, 2016.

37. SourceWatch. Covance Laboratories. Sourcewatch.org. http://www.sourcewatch. org/index.php/Covance_Laboratories. Pub­ lished 2015. Accessed January 4, 2017.

28. Sense about Science. News & campaigns.

senseaboutscience.org. http://senseabout­ science.org/news-and-campaigns/. Pub­ lished 2016. Accessed December 28, 2016.

38. Soares E. Restrictions on genetically mod­

29. Powerbase. Sense About Science. power­

ified organisms: Brazil. Library of Con­ gress. http://www.loc.gov/law/help/restric­ tions-on-gmos/brazil.php. Published March

2014. Accessed January 5, 2017.

base.info. http://powerbase.info/index.php/ Sense_About_Science. Published 2015. Ac­ cessed December 28, 2016.

30. Sense About Science. Are there danger­

39. Norero D. Latin American GMO power­

ous pesticides in our bread? http://archive. senseaboutscience.org/for_the_record. php/159/are-there-dangerous-pesticides-inour-bread.html. Published July 17, 2014. Ac­ cessed January 13, 2017.

house Brazil expands portfolio of crops with intro of new herbicide resistant soy. Genetic Literacy Project. https://www. geneticliteracyproject.org/2015/09/09/ latin-american-gmo-powerhouse-brazilexpands-portfolio-of-crops-with-intro-ofnew-herbicide-resistant-soy/. Published September 9, 2015. Accessed January 5, 2017.

31. Corbyn Z. Charity guide criticised for not

declaring GM interests. Times High Educ. February 2009. https://www.timeshigher­ education.com/news/charity-guide-crit­ icised-for-not-declaring-gm-inter­ ests/405427.article. Accessed December 28, 2016.

40. Paarlberg RL. The Politics of Precaution:

Genetically Modified Crops in Developing Countries. In: The Politics of Precaution: Genetically Modified Crops in Develop­ ing Countries. Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins University Press; 2001:79.

32. The editors of Private Eye. Untitled. Priv

Eye. 2009;1232. http://powerbase.info/in­ dex.php/Sense_About_Science#cite_note-94.

41. The University of Michigan. David H Ga­

rabrant – Grants — The University of Mich­ igan. umich.edu. https://experts.umich.edu/ en/persons/david-h-garabrant/projects/?sta­ tus=FINISHED. Published 2016. Accessed De­ cember 28, 2016.

33. Powerbase. Sense About Science funding

history. powerbase.info. http://powerbase. info/index.php/Sense_About_Science_ Funding_History. Published 2015. Accessed January 13, 2017.

42. GMWatch. Expertise for sale: How an expert

34. Covance. Covance Laboratories Inc., Unit of

with close links to industry has been influ­

encing policy for decades. http://gmwatch. org/news/latest-news/17333-expertise-forsale-how-an-expert-with-close-links-to-in­ dustry-has-been-influencing-policy-fordecades. Published November 22, 2016. Accessed January 1, 2017.

2013;43(4):283-315. doi:10.3109/10408444.20 13.770820.

50. Tataryn L. Formaldehyde on Trial: The Pol­

itics of Health in a Chemical Society. In: To­ ronto, Canada: James Lorimer & Company; 1983:129.

43. Chambers JE, Greim H, Kendall RJ, Segner

H, Sharpe RM, Van Der Kraak G. Human and ecological risk assessment of a crop protec­ tion chemical: a case study with the azole fungicide epoxiconazole. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2014;44(2):176-210. doi:10.3109/10408444.20 13.855163.

51. Hauptmann M, Lubin JH, Stewart PA, Hayes

RB, Blair A. Mortality from lymphohema­ topoietic malignancies among workers in formaldehyde industries. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003;95(21):1615-1623.

52. Hauptmann M, Lubin JH, Stewart PA, Hayes

44. Kjærstad MB, Andersen HR, Taxvig C, et al.

RB, Blair A. Mortality from solid cancers among workers in formaldehyde indus­ tries. Am J Epidemiol. 2004;159(12):1117-1130. doi:10.1093/aje/kwh174.

Effects of Azole Fungicides on the Function of Sex and Thyroid Hormones. Copenha­ gen, Denmark: Danish Ministry of the Envi­ ronment/Environmental Protection Agency;

2007. http://www.forskningsdatabasen.dk/ en/catalog/2186103081.

53. Beane Freeman LE, Blair A, Lubin JH, et al.

Mortality from lymphohematopoietic ma­ lignancies among workers in formaldehyde industries: the National Cancer Institute Co­ hort. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2009;101(10):751-761. doi:10.1093/jnci/djp096.

45. RIFM Expert Panel, Belsito D, Bickers D, et al.

A toxicologic and dermatologic assessment of cyclopentanones and cyclopentenones when used as fragrance ingredients. Food Chem Toxicol Int J Publ Br Ind Biol Res As­ soc. 2012;50 Suppl 3:S517-556. doi:10.1016/j. fct.2012.04.019.

54. Marsh GM, Youk AO. Reevaluation of

mortality risks from leukemia in the form­ aldehyde cohort study of the National Cancer Institute. Regul Toxicol Pharma­ col RTP. 2004;40(2):113-124. doi:10.1016/j. yrtph.2004.05.012.

46. Doull J, Gaylor D, Greim HA, Lovell DP, Lynch

B, Munro IC. Report of an Expert Panel on the reanalysis by of a 90-day study conduct­ ed by Monsanto in support of the safety of a genetically modified corn variety (MON 863). Food Chem Toxicol. 2007;45:2073-2085. doi:10.1016/j.fct.2007.08.033.

55. Marsh GM, Youk AO. Reevaluation of mor­

tality risks from nasopharyngeal cancer in the formaldehyde cohort study of the Na­ tional Cancer Institute. Regul Toxicol Phar­ macol RTP. 2005;42(3):275-283. doi:10.1016/j. yrtph.2005.05.003.

47. Séralini GE, Cellier D, Spiroux de Vendomois

J. New analysis of a rat feeding study with a genetically modified maize reveals signs of hepatorenal toxicity. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol. 2007;52:596–602.

56. Marsh GM, Youk AO, Morfeld P. Mis-spec­

ified and non-robust mortality risk models for nasopharyngeal cancer in the Nation­ al Cancer Institute formaldehyde work­ er cohort study. Regul Toxicol Pharma­ col RTP. 2007;47(1):59-67. doi:10.1016/j. yrtph.2006.07.007.

48. Horel S. Cancer au travail: la Commission eu­

ropéenne complice de l’industrie. Le Monde. http://abonnes.lemonde.fr/planete/arti­ cle/2017/02/24/cancer-au-travail-bruxellescomplice-de-l-industrie_5084643_3244.ht­ ml?h=10. Published February 24, 2017.

57. International Agency for Research on Can­

cer. IARC classifies formaldehyde as car­ cinogenic to humans: Press release no. 153. iarc.fr. https://www.iarc.fr/en/media-centre/ pr/2004/pr153.html. Published June 15, 2004. Accessed January 8, 2017.

49. Kier LD, Kirkland DJ. Review of genotox­

icity studies of glyphosate and glypho­ sate-based formulations. Crit Rev Toxicol.

58. Marsh GM. Letter to Ruth Lunn, director,

ric of false positives. Environ Health Per­ spect. 2009;117(12):1809-1813. doi:10.1289/ ehp.0901194.

RoC Center National Institute of Environ­ mental Health Sciences, re: Comments on the recommendation from the Expert Panel Report (Part B) on formaldehyde, 74 Fed. Reg. 67,883 (December 21, 2009). February

2010. http://bit.ly/2iS1Q54.

68. EWG. EWG’s healthy home tips: Tip 6 – Skip the non-stick to avoid the dangers of Teflon. EWG. http://www.ewg.org/re­ search/healthy-home-tips/tip-6-skip-nonstick-avoid-dangers-teflon. Published Octo­ ber 2015. Accessed January 13, 2017.

59. US National Toxicology Program. Twelfth

Report on Carcinogens. Research Triangle Park, NC: US Department of Health and Hu­ man Services Public Health Service Nation­ al Toxicology Program; 2011. www.iaff.org/ HS/PDF/12th%20Report%20on%20Carcino­ gens%20-%202011.pdf.

69. Roberts D. Uncovering the Weinberg Group.

Vanity Fair. April 2008. http://www.vanity­ fair.com/news/2008/04/uncovering-the.

70. Intertek. Why Intertek Scientific & Regulato­

60. Tate & Lyle. About us. tateandlyle.com. http://tateandlyle.com/aboutus/pages/ aboutus.aspx. Published 2017. Accessed Jan­ uary 8, 2017.

ry Consultancy? intertek.com. http://www. intertek.com/green/why-cantox/. Published

2016. Accessed December 27, 2016.

71. Imperial College London. Professor Alan

61. SourceWatch. International Society of Reg­

Boobis OBE. imperial.ac.uk. http://www. imperial.ac.uk/people/a.boobis. Published

2017. Accessed February 22, 2017.

ulatory Toxicology & Pharmacology. source­ watch.org. http://www.sourcewatch.org/ index.php/International_Society_of_Reg­ ulatory_Toxicology_%26_Pharmacology. Published 2016. Accessed January 9, 2017.

72. Neslen A. UN/WHO panel in conflict of in­

terest row over glyphosate cancer risk. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/ environment/2016/may/17/unwho-panel-inconflict-of-interest-row-over-glyphosatescancer-risk. Published May 17, 2016. Ac­ cessed January 22, 2017.

62. CropLife America. Who we are. CropLife

America. http://www.croplifeamerica.org/ who-we-are/. Published 2017. Accessed Jan­ uary 12, 2017.

63. Geniella M. Biotech backers pile on cash

73. University of Milan. Moretto Angelo - Uni­

in Mendocino. Press Democrat. Published March 2, 2004.

versità degli Studi di Milano. unimi.it. http:// www.unimi.it/chiedove/schedaPersonaX­ ML.jsp?matricola=17330. Published 2017. Accessed February 22, 2017.

64. James C. Global Status of Commercialized

Biotech/GM Crops: 2014. Ithaca, NY: ISAAA;

2014. http://www.isaaa.org/resources/publi­ cations/briefs/49/default.asp.

74. Nagourney E. Dr Marvin Kuschner, 83, Dean

of Long Island Medical School. The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2002/11/10/ nyregion/dr-marvin-kuschner-83-dean-oflong-island-medical-school.html. Published November 10, 2002. Accessed February 22, 2017.

65. ILSI HESI. Evaluating Causality in Epidemio­

logical Studies Subcommittee. Washington, DC; 2012. http://bit.ly/2jHSzjs.

66. Burns CJ, Wright JM, Pierson JB, et al.

Evaluating uncertainty to strengthen ep­ idemiologic data for use in human health risk assessments. Environ Health Per­ spect. 2014;122(11):1160-1165. doi:10.1289/ ehp.1308062.

75. US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

Memo: Second Peer Review of Glyphosate. Washington, DC: US Environmental Pro­ tection Agency (EPA); 1991. https://www3. epa.gov/pesticides/chem_search/cleared_re­ views/csr_PC-103601_30-Oct-91_265.pdf.

67. Blair A, Saracci R, Vineis P, et al. Epide­

miology, public health, and the rheto­

76. Prabook. Marvin Kuschner. prabook.com.

http://prabook.com/web/person-view.htm­ l?profileId=625517. Published 2017.

view-clearl. Published March 23, 2015. Ac­ cessed January 31, 2017.

77. Casetext. KEMNER v. MONSANTO CO, 217 Ill.

4. RMS Germany. Renewal Assessment Re­

App.3d 188 (Ill. App. Ct. 1991).(Illinois App. Ct. 1991). https://casetext.com/case/kemnerv-monsanto-co. Accessed February 1, 2017.

port Glyphosate. Addendum 1 to RAR, As­ sessment of IARC Monographs Volume 112 (2015): Glyphosate, 31 August 2015. Berlin, Germany; 2015. http://gmwatch.org/files/ Renewal_Assessment_Report_Glyphosate_ Addendum1_RAR.pdf.

78. The Mesothelioma Center. Johns Manville

– History, litigation and the Manville Trust. asbestos.com. https://www.asbestos.com/ companies/johns-manville.php. Published

2017. Accessed February 6, 2017.

5. European Food Safety Authority (EFSA).

Conclusion on the peer review of the pes­ ticide risk assessment of the active sub­ stance glyphosate. EFSA J. 2015;13(11):4302. doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2015.4302.

79. Whysner J, Covello VT, Kuschner M, et al.

Asbestos in the air of public buildings: a public health risk? Prev Med. 1994;23(1):119-125. doi:10.1006/pmed.1994.1017.

6. JMPR. Pesticide Residues in Food 2016. Spe­

cial Session of the Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues. FAO Plant Produc­ tion and Protection Paper 227. Rome, Italy: World Health Organization, Food and Agri­ culture Organization of the United Nations;

2016. http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5693e.pdf.

80. Leagle.com. BULLARD v. JOHNS-MAN­ VILLE CORP. | 256 S.E.2d 520 (1979). (Court of Appeals of North Carolina 1979). http://lea­ gle.com/decision/1979776256SE2d520_1723/ BULLARD v. JOHNS-MANVILLE CORP. Ac­ cessed February 6, 2017.

7. Huffstutter PJ. EPA says glyphosate, used in

81. Picht R. Kodak struggles to defend itself

Monsanto herbicide, likely not carcinogen­ ic. Reuters. http://uk.reuters.com/article/ us-usa-epa-glyphosate-idUKKCN11M28X. Published September 16, 2016. Accessed February 14, 2017.

against charges it is polluting. Schenectady Gazette. http://bit.ly/2jSXFJY. Published De­ cember 12, 1988.

Chapter 4

8. International Agency for Research on Can­

cer. IARC Monographs Questions and An­ swers. Lyon, France: World Health Orga­ nization; 2015. https://monographs.iarc.fr/ ENG/News/Q&A_ENG.pdf.

1. International Agency for Research on Can­

cer. IARC Monographs Volume 112: Evalua­ tion of Five Organophosphate Insecticides and Herbicides. Lyon, France: World Health Organization; 2015. http://monographs.iarc. fr/ENG/Monographs/vol112/.

9. European Parliament and Council. Regula­

tion (EC) No 1107/2009 of 21 October 2009 concerning the placing of plant protec­ tion products on the market and repealing Council Directives 79/117/EEC and 91/414/ EEC. Off J Eur Union. October 2009:1–50.

2. Environmental Working Group. EWG calls

on Monsanto to retract remarks on WHO weed-killer report. EWG. http://www.ewg. org/release/ewg-calls-monsanto-retract-re­ marks-who-weed-killer-report. Published April 3, 2015. Accessed January 31, 2017.

10. EPA’s Office of Pesticide Programs. Glyphosate

Issue Paper: Evaluation of Carcinogenic Poten­ tial. Washington, DC: US Environmental Protec­ tion Agency (EPA); 2016. http://bit.ly/2mKaseA.

3. Monsanto. Monsanto reinforces decades of

data and regulatory review clearly docu­ ment safety of glyphosate. monsanto.com. http://news.monsanto.com/press-release/ research-and-development/monsanto-re­ inforces-decades-data-and-regulatory-re­

11. BfR. Populäre Missverständnisse, Meinun­

gen Und Fragen Im Zusammenhang Mit Der Risikobewertung Des BfR Zu Glyphosat. Mitteilung Nr. 013/2016 Des BfR Vom 19. Mai

2016. Berlin, Germany: BfR; 2016. http://www. bfr.bund.de/cm/343/populaere-missver­ s t a e n d n i s s e - m e i n u n g e n - u n d - f r a ­ gen-im-zusammenhang-mit-der-risikobew­ ertung-des-bfr-zu-glyphosat.pdf.

expert panel review: a weight of evidence systematic review of the relationship be­ tween glyphosate exposure and non-Hod­ gkin’s lymphoma or multiple myeloma. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2016;46(sup1):28-43. doi:10.108 0/10408444.2016.1214681.

12. European Parliament and Council. Regula­

tion (EC) no. 1272/2008 of the European Par­ liament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on classification, labelling and pack­ aging of substances and mixtures, amend­ ing and repealing Directives 67/548/EEC and 1999/45/EC, and amending Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006. Off J Eur Union. December 2008.

18. De Roos AJ, Blair A, Rusiecki JA, et al. Cancer

incidence among glyphosate-exposed pesti­ cide applicators in the Agricultural Health Study. Env Health Perspect. 2005;113:49-54.

19. Kier LD, Kirkland DJ. Review of genotox­

icity studies of glyphosate and glypho­ sate-based formulations. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2013;43(4):283-315. doi:10.3109/10408444.20 13.770820.

13. Glyphosate Task Force. Glyphosate & Its IPA-

, K-, NH4- and DMA Salts. Representative Formulation: Product MON 52276 (360 G/L Glyphosate Acid. Herbicide. Application for Renewal of Approval (AIR 2) according to Commission Regulation (EC) No. 1141/2010. Annex II–III. Tier III Summary. Overall As­ sessment and Conclusion. Brussels, Belgium: Glyphosate Task Force; 2012.

20. RMS Germany. Final Addendum to the Re­

newal Assessment Report - Public Version

- Risk Assessment Provided by the Rappor­ teur Member State Germany and Co-Rap­ porteur Member State Slovakia for the Ac­ tive Substance GLYPHOSATE according to the Procedure for the Renewal of the Inclu­ sion of a Second Group of Active Substanc­ es in Annex I to Council Directive 91/414/EEC Laid down in Commission Regulation (EU) No. 1141/2010. Volume 1. Berlin, Germany;

2015. http://gmwatch.org/files/Final_adden­ dum_to_the_Renewal_Assessment_Report. pdf.

14. RMS Germany. Renewal Assessment Report.

18 December 2013, Revised 29 January 2015, 31 March 2015. Glyphosate Volume 3: Annex B.6.1: Toxicology and Metabolism. Berlin, Germany: BfR; 2015. http://www.gmwatch. org/files/Renewal_Assessment_Report_Gly­ phosate_genotox_and_cancer.pdf.

21. Abraham W. Glyphosate formulations and

15. Organisation for Economic Cooperation

their use for the inhibition of 5-enolpyru­ vylshikimate-3-phosphate synthase. Au­ gust 2010. http://www.google.com/patents/ US7771736. Accessed February 26, 2017.

and Development (OECD). Guidance Doc­ ument 116 on the Conduct and Design of Chronic Toxicity and Carcinogenicity Stud­ ies, Supporting Test Guidelines 451, 452 and 453: 2nd Edition: Environment Directorate Joint Meeting of the Chemicals Committee and the Working Party on Chemicals, Pesti­ cides and Biotechnology.; 2012.

22. Abraham W. Glyphosate formulations and

their use for the inhibition of 5-enolpyru­ vylshikimate-3-phosphate synthase. April 2004. http://www.google.co.uk/patents/ US20040077608. Accessed February 26, 2017.

16. World Health Organization Internation­

al Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans: Preamble. Lyon, Fance: World Health Organization International Agency for Research on Can­ cer (IARC); 2006. http://monographs.iarc.fr/ ENG/Preamble/.

23. Mitchell I deG null, Dixon PA, Gilbert PJ,

White DJ. Mutagenicity of antibiotics in mi­ crobial assays. Problems of evaluation. Mu­ tat Res. 1980;79(2):91-105.

24. Luijten M, Olthof ED, Hakkert BC, et al.

An integrative test strategy for cancer hazard identification. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2016;46(7):615-639. doi:10.3109/10408444.20

17. Acquavella J, Garabrant D, Marsh G, Sora­

han T, Weed DL. Glyphosate epidemiology

16.1171294.

3. Huffstutter PJ. EPA says glyphosate, used in

Monsanto herbicide, likely not carcinogen­ ic. Reuters. http://uk.reuters.com/article/ us-usa-epa-glyphosate-idUKKCN11M28X. Published September 16, 2016. Accessed February 14, 2017.

25. Cancer Assessment Review Committee, US

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Potential of Glyphosate: Final Report. Washington, DC: US Environmental Protection Agency; 2015. https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B7hhP5Qa­ sNtsRjBBN0JOSlZWdlU/view.

4. BUND (Friends of the Earth Germany). Note

„Mangelhaft“: Das EU-Zulassungsverfahren Für Glyphosat. Warum Glyphosat Vom Markt Genommen Und Das Zulassungsver­ fahren Für Pestizide Komplett Reformiert Werden Muss. Berlin, Germany: Bund für Umwelt und Naturschutz Deutschland e.V.; 2015.

26. BAuA (German Federal Institute for Occu­

pational Safety and Health). Proposal for Harmonised Classification and Labelling. Based on Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 (CLP Regulation), Annex VI, Part 2. Substance Name: N-(Phosphonomethyl)glycine; Gly­ phosate (ISO). Dortmund, Germany: Euro­ pean Chemicals Agency (ECHA); 2016. http:// echa.europa.eu/documents/10162/13626/ clh_report_glyphosate_en.pdf.

5. European Commission. FAQs: Glyphosate.

europa.eu. http://europa.eu/rapid/press-re­ lease_MEMO-16-2012_en.htm. Published June 29, 2016. Accessed March 11, 2017.

27. Organisation for Economic Cooperation

6. Antoniou M, Habib M, Howard CV, et al.

and Development (OECD). Guidance Notes for Analysis and Evaluation of Chronic Tox­ icity and Carcinogenicity Studies. Paris, France: Organisation for Economic Coop­ eration and Development (OECD); 2002. http://www.oecd.org/officialdocuments/ publicdisplaydocumentpdf/?cote=env/jm/ mono%282002%2919&doclanguage=en.

Roundup and Birth Defects: Is the Public Being Kept in the Dark? Earth Open Source; 2011. http://earthopensource.org/earthopen-source-reports/roundup-and-birthdefects-is-the-public-being-kept-in-thedark/.

7. European Commission Health & Consumer

Protection Directorate-General. Review Re­ port for the Active Substance Glyphosate. Brussels, Belgium: European Commission; 2002.

28. Clausing P. The Carcinogenic Hazard of

Glyphosate: BfR’s “weight of Evidence Ap­ proach.” Hamburg, Germany: Pesticide Ac­ tion Network Germany; 2017. http://www. pan-germany.org/download/The_Carcino­ genic_Hazard_of_Glyphosate.pdf.

8. Antoniou M, Habib MEM, Leifert C, et al.

Teratogenic effects of glyphosate-based herbicides: Divergence of regulatory deci­ sions from scientific evidence. J Env Anal Toxicol. 2012;S4:006. doi:10.4172/2161-0525. S4-006.

Chapter 5

1. RMS Germany. Renewal Assessment Re­

port Glyphosate. Addendum 1 to RAR, As­ sessment of IARC Monographs Volume 112 (2015): Glyphosate, 31 August 2015. Berlin, Germany; 2015. http://gmwatch.org/files/ Renewal_Assessment_Report_Glyphosate_ Addendum1_RAR.pdf.

9. Bundesinstitut für Risikobewertung (BfR).

Neue Daten Zu Gesundheitlichen Aspek­ ten von Glyphosat? Eine Aktuelle, Vor-Läu­ fige Facheinschätzung Des BfR (in Englisch) [New Data on Health Aspects of Glypho­ sate? A Current, Preliminary Assessment by BfR]. Stellungnahme Nr. 035/2011. Berlin, Germany: BfR; 2011. http://bit.ly/2lZiXFq.

2. European Food Safety Authority (EFSA).

Conclusion on the peer review of the pes­ ticide risk assessment of the active sub­ stance glyphosate. EFSA J. 2015;13(11):4302. doi:10.2903/j.efsa.2015.4302.

10. European Chemicals Agency (ECHA). ECHA’s

role in assessing glyphosate. echa.europe. eu. https://echa.europa.eu/view-article/-/

journal_content/title/echa-s-role-in-assess­ ing-glyphosate. Published 2017. Accessed January 20, 2017.

fr/ENG/Monographs/vol112/.

17. Robinson C. German toxicologist accuses EU

authorities of scientific fraud over glyphosate link with cancer. GMWatch. http://gmwatch. org/news/archive/2016-articles/17307-ger­ man-toxicologist-accuses-eu-author­ ities-of-scientific-fraud-over-glypho­ sate-link-with-cancer. Published November 3, 2016. Accessed January 23, 2017.

11. Corporate Europe Observatory. EU review

of weedkiller glyphosate adds secrecy to controversy. Corporate Europe Observatory. https://corporateeurope.org/food-and-ag­ riculture/2016/01/eu-review-weedkiller-gly­ phosate-adds-secrecy-controversy. Pub­ lished January 14, 2017. Accessed January 20, 2017.

18. RMS Germany. Renewal Assessment Report.

18 December 2013, Revised 29 January 2015, 31 March 2015. Glyphosate Volume 3: Annex B.6.1: Toxicology and Metabolism. Berlin, Germany: BfR; 2015. http://www.gmwatch. org/files/Renewal_Assessment_Report_Gly­ phosate_genotox_and_cancer.pdf.

12. Corporate Europe Observatory. The gly­

phosate saga and “independent scientif­ ic advice” according to Germany, the UK & France. Corporate Europe Observatory. https://corporateeurope.org/food-and-ag­ riculture/2015/04/glyphosate-saga-inde­ pendent-scientific-advice-according-ger­ many-uk. Published April 2, 2015. Accessed January 20, 2017.

19. BfR. Fragen und Antworten zur Sicherung

der Unabhängigkeit des Bundesinstituts für Risikobewertung. bfr.bund.de. http://www. bfr.bund.de/de/fragen_und_antworten_ zur_sicherung_der_unabhaengigkeit_ des_bundesinstituts_fuer_risikobewer­ tung-129744.html. Published February 27,

2015. Accessed January 23, 2017.

13. Corporate Europe Observatory. More than

half of experts at the EU food safety au­ thority have conflicts of interest. Corporate Europe Observatory. https://corporateeu­ rope.org/pressreleases/2013/10/more-halfexperts-eu-food-safety-authority-have-con­ flicts-interest. Published October 23, 2013. Accessed January 24, 2017.

20. Doe JE, Boobis AR, Blacker A, et al. A tiered

approach to systemic toxicity testing for ag­ ricultural chemical safety assessment. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2006;36:37-68.

14. Corporate Europe Observatory. Unhap­

py Meal: The European Food Safety Au­ thority’s Independence Problem. Brussels, Belgium: Corporate Europe Observatory; 2013. http://corporateeurope.org/sites/de­ fault/files/attachments/unhappy_meal_re­ port_23_10_2013.pdf. Accessed October 28, 2013.

21. ECETOC. Workshop on Risk Assessment of

Endocrine Disrupting Chemicals 9–10 May 2011, Florence. Brussels, Belgium: ECETOC;

2011. http://www.ecetoc.org/uploads/Docu­ ments/ED%20WS%20Booklet.pdf.

22. ECETOC. ECETOC - Member companies. ece­

toc.org. Published March 16, 2016. Accessed January 23, 2017.

15. Corporate Europe Observatory. EFSA’s

credibility loopholes. Corporate Europe Observatory. https://corporateeurope.org/ efsa/2014/11/efsas-credibility-loopholes. Published November 20, 2014. Accessed February 6, 2017.

23. ECETOC. Shaping the global chemicals re­

search agenda. ecetoc.org. Published March 15, 2016. Accessed January 23, 2017.

24. ILSI HESI. RISK21 Technical Committee Mem­

bers. Washington, DC: ILSI HESI; 2014. http:// www.hesiglobal.org

16. International Agency for Research on Can­

cer. IARC Monographs Volume 112: Evalua­ tion of Five Organophosphate Insecticides and Herbicides. Lyon, France: World Health Organization; 2015. http://monographs.iarc.

25. ILSI HESI. Risk assessment in the 21st centu­

ry (RISK21) – Mission statement. hesiglobal. org. http://hesiglobal.org/risk-assessmentin-the-21st-century-risk21/. Published 2017.

Accessed January 23, 2017.

Agriculture Organization of the United Na­ tions. Pesticide Residues in Food 2011: Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues: Evaluations 2011 Part I - Residues. Rome, Italy; 2011. http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/ templates/agphome/documents/Pests_Pes­ ticides/JMPR/Evaluation11/Contents.pdf.

26. ILSI HESI. Health and Environmental Science

Institute Bylaws Article 1 General. Undat­ ed. https://www.industrydocumentslibrary. ucsf.edu/tobacco/docs/#id=tmmk0214.

27. European Food Safety Authority. Scientif­

ic Committee Members, 2015–2018: Decla­ rations of Interest and CVs. DoI of Roland Solecki. efsa.europa.eu. https://www.efsa. europa.eu/en/panels/scientific-committee. Published December 2, 2016. Accessed Janu­ ary 23, 2017.

34. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)

and World Health Organization (WHO). Pesticide Residues in Food – 2011: Joint FAO/ WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues: Eval­ uations 2011, Part II – Toxicological. Gene­ va, Switzerland: FAO and WHO; 2011. http:// www.inchem.org/documents/jmpr/jmpmo­ no/v2011pr01.pdf.

28. BfR. Löst Glyphosat Krebs Aus? Berlin, Ger­

many: BfR; 2015. http://www.bfr.bund.de/ cm/343/loest-glyphosat-krebs-aus.pdf.

35. WHO Core Assessment Group on Pesticides

expert task force on Diazinon, Glyphosate and Malathion. Main Findings and Recom­ mendations of the WHO Core Assessment Group on Pesticides Expert Task Force on Diazinon, Glyphosate and Malathion. Ge­ neva, Switzerland: WHO; 2015. http://www. who.int/foodsafety/areas_work/chemi­ cal-risks/main_findings_and_recommenda­ tions.pdf.

29. JMPR. Pesticide Residues in Food 2016. Spe­

cial Session of the Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues. FAO Plant Produc­ tion and Protection Paper 227. Rome, Italy: World Health Organization, Food and Agri­ culture Organization of the United Nations;

2016. http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5693e.pdf.

30. JMPR. 742. Glyphosate (Pesticide residues in

food: 1986 evaluations Part II Toxicology). http://www.inchem.org/documents/jmpr/ jmpmono/v86pr08.htm. Published 1986. Ac­ cessed March 12, 2017.

36. Liebrich S. Weltgesundheitsorganisation

rüffelt Glyphosat-Prüfer. sueddeutsche.de. http://www.sueddeutsche.de/wirtschaft/ landwirtschaft-weltgesundheitsorganisa­ tion-rueffelt-glyphosat-pruefer-1.2655778. Published September 20, 2015. Accessed January 24, 2017.

31. Pfeil R, Niemann L. Glyphosate 95–169

JMPR 2004. BfR; 2004. http://apps.who.int/ pesticide-residues-jmpr-database/Docu­ ment/164.

37. Verger P. RE: Question about the Expert

Taskforce on Diazinon, Glyphosate. July 2015.

32. World Health Organization and Food and

Agriculture Organization. Pesticide Res­ idues in Food – 2004. Report of the Joint Meeting of the FAO Panel of Experts on Pesticide Residues in Food and the Environ­ ment and the WHO Core Assessment Group on Pesticide Residues: Rome, Italy, 20–29 September 2004. Rome, Italy; 2004. http:// www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/ag­ phome/documents/Pests_Pesticides/JMPR/ Reports_1991-2006/report2004jmpr.pdf.

38. Neslen A. UN/WHO panel in conflict of in­

terest row over glyphosate cancer risk. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/ environment/2016/may/17/unwho-panel-inconflict-of-interest-row-over-glyphosatescancer-risk. Published May 17, 2016. Ac­ cessed January 22, 2017.

39. Corporate Europe Observatory. The In­

ternational Life Sciences Institute (ILSI), a Corporate Lobby Group. Brussels, Belgium: Corporate Europe Observatory; 2012. http:// corporateeurope.org/sites/default/files/il­

33. World Health Organization and Food and

si-article-final.pdf.

Lyon, Fance: World Health Organization International Agency for Research on Can­ cer (IARC); 2006. http://monographs.iarc.fr/ ENG/Preamble/.

40. Flausch M. Commission prolongs glypho­

sate licence by 18 months. EurActiv.com. https://www.euractiv.com/section/agricul­ ture-food/news/commission-prolongs-gly­ phosate-licence-by-18-months/. Published June 29, 2016. Accessed January 23, 2017.

47. Kelland K. Who says bacon is bad? Reu­

ters. http://www.reuters.com/investigates/ special-report/health-who-iarc/. Published April 18, 2016. Accessed January 24, 2017.

41. Corporate Europe Observatory. A busy

May for Professor Boobis. Corporate Eu­ rope Observatory. https://corporateeu­ rope.org/food-and-agriculture/2016/05/ busy-may-professor-boobis. Published May 16, 2016. Accessed February 27, 2017.

48. Robinson C. Industry fingerprints all over

Reuters’ attack on IARC over glyphosate and cancer. The Ecologist. http://www.theecolo­ gist.org/News/news_analysis/2987591/indus­ try_fingerprints_all_over_reuters_attack_ on_iarc_over_glyphosate_and_cancer.html. Published April 21, 2016. Accessed January 24, 2017.

42. European Commission. COMMISSION DECI­

SION of 14.4.2015 Appointing Members of the Scientific Committee on Occupational Exposure Limits for Chemical Agents for a New Term of Office. Brussels, Belgium: European Commission; 2015. http://ec.eu­ ropa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=148&intPage­ Id=684&langId=en.

43. Horel S. Cancer au travail: la Commission eu­

ropéenne complice de l’industrie. Le Monde. http://abonnes.lemonde.fr/planete/arti­ cle/2017/02/24/cancer-au-travail-bruxellescomplice-de-l-industrie_5084643_3244.ht­ ml?h=10. Published February 24, 2017.

44. Gillam C. Questions about EPA-Monsanto

collusion raised in cancer lawsuits. Huffing­ ton Post. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/ carey-gillam/questions-about-epa-mon­ sa_b_14727648.html. Published February 13,

2017. Accessed February 14, 2017.

45. Union of Concerned Scientists. Interference

at the EPA: Science and Politics at the US Environmental Protection Agency. Cam­ bridge, MA: Union of Concerned Scientists;

2008. http://www.ucsusa.org/our-work/cen­ ter-science-and-democracy/promoting-sci­ entific-integrity/interference-at-the-epa. html. Accessed December 28, 2016.

46. World Health Organization Internation­

al Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans: Preamble.

About the

As a postdoctoral scientist he worked at the US FDA’s National Center for Toxicological Re­ search from 1994–1996. From 1997 until retire­ ment in 2010 he was employed as a senior toxi­ cologist in the pharmaceutical industry. He has published 54 papers and four book chapters in the area of toxicology. He has also written two books on the conflicts between, and the compatibility of, agriculture and nature con­ servation. Since 2014 he has been a member of Pesticide Action Network (PAN) Germany and was elected to its executive board in 2015. He has authored several of PAN Germany’s publi­ cations.

authors

Dr Helmut Burtscher-Schaden was born in 1966 in Höchst, Austria. He studied biochemis­ try at the Vienna University of Technology and worked in medical and immunological research at the Medical University of Vienna, complet­ ing his thesis at the University’s Institute of Im­ munology. Since 2001 he has worked for the environmental NGO GLOBAL 2000 (Friends of the Earth Austria). He is one of seven initiators of the European Citizens’ Initiative “Stop Gly­ phosat”. (Photo by Manfred Weis)

Claire Robinson, MPhil is the editor of GM­ Watch, a UK-based public news and infor­ mation service on genetically modified (GM) foods and crops. Together with two genetic engineers, she is a co-author of the book, GMO Myths and Truths (2015), which explains in lay terms the scientific and other documented evi­ dence urging caution with regard to GM crops and their associated pesticides. She is a co-au­ thor of the report, “Roundup and birth defects: Is the public being kept in the dark?” (2011), as well as of a peer-reviewed article based on the report. The report argues that the pesticide in­ dustry and EU regulators knew decades ago of a link between glyphosate and its commercial formulations and birth defects – but failed to inform the public.

Dr Peter Clausing graduated as an agronomist at the University of Leipzig and earned his doc­ toral degree in 1974. After post-graduate stud­ ies in toxicology he became a board-certified toxicologist in 1988 and held positions at two research institutes in the former East Germany.